Kaspersky Endpoint Security for
Linux

© 2026 AO Kaspersky Lab




                          1
Contents
Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux Help
Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux
  About Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage modes
  Distribution kit
  Hardware and software requirements
     Hardware requirements
     Software requirements
     Supported versions of Kaspersky Security Center
     Supported versions of Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform
What's new
Preparing to install Kaspersky Endpoint Security
Installation and initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  The installation and initial configuration of Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent
  Installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-ins
     Installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security web plug-in
     Installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC plug-in
  Installing and initially configuring the application using Kaspersky Security Center
     Creating an installation package in the Web Console
     Creating an installation package in the Administration Console
     Preparing an archive with application databases in order to create an installation package with integrated databases
     Autoinstall.ini configuration file parameters
     Getting started using Kaspersky Security Center
  Installing and initially configuring the application using the command line
     Installing the application using the command line
     Post-installation configuration of the application in interactive mode
       Selecting the application usage mode
       Defining the role of the virtual machine
       Enabling VDI protection mode
       Selecting the locale
       Viewing the End User License Agreement and the Privacy Policy
       Accepting the End User License Agreement
       Accepting the Privacy Policy
       Using Kaspersky Security Network
       Removing users from privileged groups
       Assigning the Administrator role to a user
       Determining the file operation interceptor type
       Enabling automatic configuration of SELinux
       Configuring the update source
       Configuring proxy server settings
       Starting an application database update
       Enabling automatic application database update
       Application activation



                                                                2
     Post-installation configuration of the application in automatic mode
     Settings in the configuration file for post-installation configuration
  Configuring allowing rules in the SELinux system
  Running the application on Astra Linux OS in closed software environment mode
  Running the application on ALT SP in closed software environment mode
  Configuring the OSnova operating system for the application to work
Updating the application from a previous version
  Updating Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-ins
  Updating the application using Kaspersky Security Center
  Updating the application using the command line
  Special considerations when setting parameter values when updating the application
Uninstalling the application
  Uninstalling the application and Network Agent using Kaspersky Security Center
  Uninstalling the application using the command line
  Network Agent removal using the command line
  Uninstalling the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-ins
Application licensing
  About the End User License Agreement
  About the license
  About the License certificate
  About the license key
  About the activation code
  About the key file
  About subscription
  Comparison of application features across different licenses
  Application activation and license key management
     Activating the application using Kaspersky Security Center
     License key management in the command line
  Viewing information about used license keys
     Viewing information about license keys on a device using the Web Console
     Viewing information about license keys on a device using the Administration Console
     Viewing information about the license and the key in the command line
Data provision
  Data provided when using an activation code
  Data provided when downloading updates from Kaspersky update servers
  Data transferred when using the application in Light Agent mode
  Data sent to Kaspersky Security Center
  Data provided when following links in the application interface
  Data provided when using Kaspersky Security Network
  Data provided when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
  Data provided when integrating with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component
  Data provided when integrating with the Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) component
  Data provided when integrating with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform
Application management concept
  Managing the application using Kaspersky Security Center
     Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-ins
     Kaspersky Security Center policies
                                                                3
    Tasks for Kaspersky Endpoint Security created in Kaspersky Security Center
    Logging in and out of the Web Console and Cloud Console
    Managing policies in the Web Console
       Creating a policy in the Web Console
       Changing policy settings in the Web Console
       Policy settings in the Web Console
    Managing policies in the Administration Console
       Creating a policy using the Administration Console
       Changing policy settings in the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console
       Policy settings in the Administration Console
    Managing tasks in the Web Console
       Creating tasks in the Web Console
       Changing task settings in the Web Console
       Starting, stopping, pausing, and resuming tasks in the Web Console
    Managing tasks in the Administration Console
       Creating tasks in the Administration Console
       Changing task settings in the Administration Console
       Starting, stopping, pausing, and resuming tasks in the Administration Console
  Managing the application using the command line
    Enabling automatic addition of kesl-control commands (bash completion)
    Task management in the command line
       Viewing a list of tasks in the command line
       Viewing the status of a task in the command line
       Creating a task in the command line
       Starting, stopping, pausing, and resuming tasks in the command line
       Deleting a task in the command line
    Displaying task settings in the command line
    Editing task settings in the command line
       Editing task settings using a configuration file
       Editing task settings using the command line options
       Restoring default task settings in the command line
    Configuring task schedule in the command line
    Managing general application settings in the command line
       Displaying general application settings
       Editing general application settings
    Using filters to limit results of queries
    Exporting and importing application settings
    Managing user roles using the command line
       Viewing a list of users and roles
       Assigning a role to a user
       Revoking a user role
Starting and stopping the application
  Starting and stopping the application using the Web Console
  Starting and stopping the application using the Administration Console
  Starting and stopping the application using the command line




                                                              4
Viewing the protection status of a device and information about application performance
  Viewing the protection status of a device in the Web Console
  Viewing the protection status of a device in the Administration Console
  Viewing information about the operation of an application in the Web Console
  Viewing information about the operation of an application in the Administration Console
  Viewing information about the operation of an application in the command line
  Viewing application statistics
    Viewing application statistics in the Web Console
    Viewing application statistics in the Administration Console
    Viewing a list of mount points in the Web Console
    Viewing the list of mount points in the Administration Console
    Viewing application statistics and the list of mount points in the command line
  Obtaining system performance metrics
Updating application databases and modules
  Updating databases and modules
  Updating sources and update scenarios
  Updating application databases and modules in the Web Console
  Updating application databases and modules in the Administration Console
  Updating application databases and modules in the command line
  Updating using Kaspersky Update Utility
  Rolling back application database and module updates
File Threat Protection
  Configuring File Threat Protection in the Web Console
    Protection scopes window
    Add protection scope window
    File Threat Protection exclusions
       Exclusion scopes window
       Add exclusion scope window
       Exclusions by mask window
       Exclusions by threat name window
       Exclusions by process window
       Trusted process window
  Configuring File Threat Protection in the Administration Console
    Scan scopes window
    <New scan scope> window
    Scan settings window
    Action on threat detection window
    File Threat Protection exclusions
       Exclusion scopes window
       <New exclusion scope> window
       Exclusions by mask window
       Exclusions by threat name window
       Exclusions by process window
       Trusted process window




                                                             5
  Configuring File Threat Protection in the command line
    File Threat Protection task settings
    Optimizing network directory scanning
  Special considerations for scanning symbolic links and hard links
Malware Scan
  Malware Scan in the Web Console
    Add scan scope window
    Scan scopes section
    Scan scopes window
    Exclusion scopes section
    Exclusion scopes window
    Add exclusion scope window
    Exclusions by mask window
    Exclusions by threat name window
  Malware Scan in the Administration Console
    Scan scopes window
    <New scan scope> window
    Scan scope settings window
    Scan scopes window
    Scan settings window
    Action on threat detection window
    Exclusions section
    Exclusion scopes window
    <New exclusion scope> window
    Exclusions by mask window
    Exclusions by threat name window
  Malware Scan in the command line
    Settings of the Malware Scan predefined task
    Custom Scan of files and directories on the command line
Critical Areas Scan
  Critical Areas Scan in the Web Console
    Add scan scope window
    Scan scopes section
    Scan scopes window
    Exclusion scopes section
    Exclusion scopes window
    Add exclusion scope window
    Exclusions by mask window
    Exclusions by threat name window
  Critical Areas Scan in the Administration Console
    Scan scopes window
    <New scan scope> window
    Scan scope settings window
    Scan scopes window
    Scan settings window
    Action on threat detection window
    Exclusions section
                                                              6
    Exclusion scopes window
    <New exclusion scope> window
    Exclusions by mask window
    Exclusions by threat name window
  Critical Areas Scan in the command line
Removable Drives Scan
  Configuring Removable Drives Scan in the Web Console
  Configuring Removable Drives Scan in the Administration Console
  Configuring Removable Drives Scan in the command line
Container Scan
  Container monitoring
    Configuring container monitoring in the Web Console
    Configuring container monitoring in the Administration Console
      Container Scan settings window
    Configuring container monitoring in the command line
  On-demand scan of containers and images
    Container Scan in the Web Console
      Exclusion scopes section
      Exclusions by mask window
      Exclusions by threat name window
    Container Scan in the Administration Console
      Container Scan settings window
      Scan settings window
      Action on threat detection window
      Exclusions section
      Exclusions by mask window
      Exclusions by threat name window
    Container Scan in the command line
      Container scan task settings
      Custom scan of containers and images
      Integration with Jenkins
Firewall Management
  About network packet rules
  About dynamic rules
  About the predefined available networks
  Firewall Management in the Web Console
    Network packet rules window
    Network packet rule window
    Available networks window
    Network connection window
  Firewall Management in the Administration Console
    Network packet rules window
    Added network packet rule window
    Add IP addresses window
    Available networks window
    Network connection window


                                                           7
  Firewall Management in the command line
    Configuring a list of network packet rules in the command line
    Configuring network zones in the command line
Web Threat Protection
  Configuring Web Threat Protection in the Web Console
    Web address window
  Configuring Web Threat Protection in the Administration Console
    Trusted web addresses window
    Web address window
    Scan settings window
  Configuring Web Threat Protection in the command line
Scanning network traffic
  Configuring network traffic scanning in the Web Console
    Trusted certificates window
    Adding a trusted certificate window
    Trusted domains window
    Monitored ports
  Configuring network traffic scanning in the Administration Console
    Trusted domains window
    Trusted certificates window
    Adding certificate window
    Monitored ports
  Configuring network traffic scanning on the command line
    Viewing and editing settings for encrypted connections scan
    Viewing exclusions from encrypted connections scan
    Managing the list of trusted root certificates
Network Threat Protection
  Configuring Network Threat Protection in the Web Console
    IP address window
  Configuring Network Threat Protection in the Administration Console
    Exclusions window
    IP address window
  Configuring Network Threat Protection in the command line
Protection against remote malicious encryption
  Configuring Anti-Cryptor in the Web Console
    Protection scopes window
    Add protection scope window
    Exclusion scopes window
    Add exclusion scope window
    Exclusions by mask window
  Configuring Anti-Cryptor in the Administration Console
    Scan scopes window
    <New scan scope> window
    Protection settings window
    Exclusion scopes window




                                                             8
    <New exclusion scope> window
    Exclusions by mask window
  Configuring Anti-Cryptor in the command line
Managing blocked devices
Application Control
  About Application Control rules
  Configuring Application Control in the Web Console
    Application Control rules window
    Application Control rule window
    Application categories window
    Select user or group window
  Configuring Application Control in the Administration Console
    Application Control rules window
    Adding rule window
    Application categories window
    User or group window
  Configuring Application Control in the command line
    Application Control task settings
    Creating and editing a list of categories
    Viewing the list of categories
    Configuring the Application Control rule list
Inventory
  Configuring Inventory in the Web Console
    Add scan scope window
    Exclusion scopes section
    Exclusion scopes window
    Add exclusion scope window
  Configuring Inventory in the Administration Console
    Scan scopes window
    <New scan scope> window
    Exclusions section
    Exclusion scopes window
    <New exclusion scope> window
  Configuring Inventory on the command line
    Inventory task settings
    Viewing a list of detected applications
Device Control
  Configuring Device Control in the Web Console
    Trusted devices window
    Trusted device (Device ID) window
    Trusted device window (List of detected devices)
    Device types window
    Device access settings window
    Device access rules window
    Select user or group window
    Schedules window


                                                            9
    Scheduling window
    Connection buses window
  Configuring Device Control in the Administration Console
    Trusted devices window
    Trusted device window
    Device window on client devices
    Device type window
    Configure device access rule window
    User or group window
    Access schedule window
    Connection buses window
  Configuring Device Control on the command line
    Device Control task settings
    Viewing the list of connected devices on the command line
Web Control
  About web resource access rules
  Configuring Web Control in the Web Console
    Web Control rule window
    Address groups window
    Group window
    Select user or group window
    Schedules window
    Access schedule window
  Configuring Web Control in the Administration Console
    Web Control rule window
    Content category selection window
    Data type category selection window
    Select addresses window
    Select address groups window
    Add address group window
    Select users window
    User or group window
    Access schedule window
  Configuring Web Control message templates
  Configuring Web Control on the command line
    Web Control task settings
    Viewing and editing Web Control settings
  Rules for creating web resource address masks
System Integrity Monitoring
  Real-time System Integrity Monitoring
    Configuring System Integrity Monitoring in the Web Console
       Monitoring scopes window
       Add monitoring scope window
       Exclusion scopes window
       Add exclusion scope window
       Exclusions by mask window


                                                             10
    Configuring System Integrity Monitoring in the Administration Console
      Scan scopes window
      <New scan scope> window
      Exclusion scopes window
      <New exclusion scope> window
      Exclusions by mask window
    Configuring System Integrity Monitoring in the command line
  System Integrity Check
    Configuring System Integrity Check in the Web Console
      Add scan scope window
      Exclusion scopes section
      Exclusion scopes window
      Add exclusion scope window
      Exclusions by mask window
    Configuring System Integrity Check in the Administration Console
      Scan scopes window
      <New scan scope> window
      Exclusion scopes section
      Exclusion scopes window
      <New exclusion scope> window
      Exclusions by mask window
    Configuring System Integrity Check in the command line
Behavior Detection
  Configuring Behavior Detection in the Web Console
    Exclusions by process window
    Adding a process exclusion scope window
  Configuring Behavior Detection in the Administration Console
    Exclusions by process window
    Trusted process window
  Configuring Behavior Detection in the command line
Using Kaspersky Security Network
  Configuring the use of Kaspersky Security Network in the Web Console
    Kaspersky Security Network Statement
    Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement
  Configuring the use of Kaspersky Security Network in the Administration Console
    Kaspersky Security Network settings
    Kaspersky Security Network Statement
    Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement
  Configuring the use of Kaspersky Security Network in the command line
    Checking the connection to Kaspersky Security Network using the command line
    Enabling and disabling cloud mode from the command line
Advanced application settings
  Configuring a proxy server
    Configuring proxy server settings in the Web Console
    Configuring proxy server settings in the Administration Console
    Configuring proxy server settings in the command line


                                                             11
  Configuring global exclusions
    Configuring global exclusions in the Web Console
       Adding a mount point exclusion window
    Configuring global exclusions in the Administration Console
       Mount point path window
    Configuring global exclusions in the command line
  Exclude process memory from scans
  Selecting the interception mode for file operations
  Configuring detection of applications that hackers can use to harm
  Enabling application stability monitoring
  Configuring application startup settings
  Limiting the use of resident memory by the application
  Limiting the use of memory and processor resources
  Limiting the number of Custom Scan tasks
  Configuring the transfer of data to Kaspersky Security Center storage
  Configuring permissions for task management
Backup
  Configuring Backup settings in the Web Console
  Configuring Backup settings in the Administration Console
  Configuring Backup settings in the command line
  Working with Backup objects in the command line
Integration with Detection and Response solutions
  About response actions for commands of Detection and Response solutions
  Integration with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform
    Configuring EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) in the Web Console
       KATA/NDR server connection settings window
       Server connection settings window
    Configuring EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) in the Administration Console
       KATA servers / NDR servers window
       KATA Server / NDR Server window
       Server connection settings window
       Adding a server certificate window
       Adding a client certificate window
       Data transfer settings window
    Configuring EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) on the command line
       Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task settings
       Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task settings
       Managing certificates for connecting to the KATA server / NDR server
    Configuring the KATA Sandbox integration in the Web Console
       Sandbox server connection settings window
       Sandbox server window
    Configuring the KATA Sandbox integration on the command line
       KATA Sandbox Integration task settings
       Managing certificates for connecting to the Sandbox server




                                                              12
Integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform
  Configuring the KUMA integration in the Web Console
    KUMA server connection settings
    KUMA server window
  Configuring the KUMA integration in the Administration Console
    KUMA servers window
    KUMA server window
    KUMA server connection settings window
    Adding a server certificate window
    Adding a client certificate window
  Configuring the MDR integration on the command line
    Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration task settings
    Managing certificates for connecting to the KUMA server
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Integration
  Enabling or disabling Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration
    Enabling or disabling Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration in the Web Console
    Enabling or disabling Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration on the command line
  Viewing the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration status
  Viewing information about a detected threat and response actions
  Searching for indicators of compromise
    Searching for indicators of compromise in the Web Console
    Searching for indicators of compromise in the command line
    Requirements for IOC files
  Start process
  Terminate process
  Receiving a file from a device
  Delete file from device
  Quarantine file
Managing the Quarantine
  Editing Quarantine settings in the Web Console
  Editing Quarantine settings in the Administration Console
  Editing Quarantine settings on the command line
  Managing quarantined files on the command line
  Sending information about quarantined files to Kaspersky Security Center
Network isolation
  Manually enabling or disabling the network isolation of the device in the Web Console
  Configuring the duration of automatic network isolation
  Manually configuring network isolation
  Configuring network isolation exclusions
    Configuring exclusions from automatic network isolation
    The window for adding a network isolation exclusion
    The Network profiles dictionary window
  Managing the network isolation of a device on the command line
Execution prevention for objects
  Configuring execution prevention for objects in the Web Console
  Configuring object execution prevention in the Administration Console
  Managing execution prevention for objects on the command line
                                                            13
  Cloud Sandbox
  Integration with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response
    Configuring KPSN to enable Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response integration
    Configuring the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response integration in the Web Console
    Configuring the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response integration in the Administration Console
    Configuring the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response integration on the command line
Configuring settings for using the application in Light Agent mode
  Configuring Light Agent settings in the Web Console
    SVM discovery settings
    Integration Server connection settings
       Connection to the Integration Server window
    SVM connection tag
    SVM selection algorithm
    Protecting the connection
  Configuring Light Agent settings in the Administration Console
    Connection to the Integration Server
       Connection to the Integration Server window
       Verify Integration Server certificate window
       Authentication on the Integration Server window
    SVM discovery settings
    SVM connection tag
    SVM selection algorithm
    Protecting the connection
  Viewing information about application usage in Light Agent mode in the command line
Viewing events and reports
  Configuring event logging to the operating system log
  Configuring application event log settings
  Viewing events in Kaspersky Security Center
  Viewing events in the command line
  Configuring the display of notifications in the graphical user interface
Application management via the graphical user interface
  Graphical user interface
  Enabling and disabling application components
  Starting and stopping scan tasks
  Starting a custom scan and a KATA Sandbox scan
  Starting and stopping the Update task
  Configuring Kaspersky Security Network
  Viewing reports
  Viewing Backup objects
  Managing license keys
    Adding a license key
    Removing a license key
    Viewing licensing information
  Creating a trace file
Application components integrity check




                                                               14
Contact Technical Support
  Technical Support via Kaspersky CompanyAccount
  Obtaining information for Technical Support
    About application trace files
    Configuring application trace settings
    Application management plug-in trace files
    About dump files
    Enabling or disabling dump logging
  Remote device diagnostics using Kaspersky Security Center
Appendices
  Appendix 1. Resource consumption optimization
    Determining the task that consumes resources
      File Threat Protection task operation analysis
      On-demand Scan tasks operation analysis
    Configuring the File Threat Protection task
    Configuring the On-demand Scan task
    Setting the application memory usage limit
  Appendix 2. Commands for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security
    Commands for managing application tasks and settings
      Commands for managing general application settings
      Commands for managing task settings
      Commands for managing tasks
      Commands for managing execution prevention for objects
      Commands for managing general container scan settings
      Commands for managing network traffic scan settings
    Statistics commands
    Commands for displaying events
    Commands for managing application events
    Commands for managing license keys
    Commands for Firewall Management
    Commands used to manage blocked devices
    Commands for managing Device Control
    Commands for managing Application Control
    Web Control management commands
    Commands for managing Backup
    Commands for managing the Quarantine
    Commands for managing users and roles
    Commands for managing EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) component settings
    Commands for managing device network isolation
    Commands for managing the KUMA integration settings
    Commands for managing the KATA Sandbox integration settings
    Commands for managing IOC scans
    Application commands in Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments
    Commands for managing system performance metrics
  Appendix 3. Configuration files and default application settings
    Rules for editing application task configuration files
    Preset configuration files
                                                             15
    Default settings for command line tasks
      Default settings for the File_Threat_Protection task (ID:1)
      Default settings for the Scan_My_Computer task (ID:2)
      Default settings for the Scan_File task (ID:3)
      Default settings for the Critical_Areas_Scan task (ID:4)
      Default settings for Update task (ID:6)
      Default settings for the System_Integrity_Monitoring task (ID:11)
      Default settings for the Firewall_Management task (ID:12)
      Default settings for the Anti_Cryptor task (ID:13)
      Default settings for the Web_Threat_Protection task (ID:14)
      Default settings for the Device_Control task (ID:15)
      Default settings for the Removable_Drives_Scan task (ID:16)
      Default settings for the Network_Threat_Protection task (ID:17)
      Default settings for Container_Scan (ID:18) and Custom_Container_Scan (ID:19) tasks
      Default settings for the Behavior_Detection task (ID:20)
      Default settings for the Application_Control task (ID:21)
      Default settings for the Inventory_Scan task (ID:22)
      Default settings for KATAEDR task (ID:24)
      Default settings for the Web_Control task (ID:26)
      Default settings for the Standalone_Sandbox task (ID:29)
      Default settings for KATANDR task (ID:31)
      Default settings for the KUMA task (ID:33)
    General application settings
    General Container Scan settings
    Network traffic scan settings
    Tasks schedule settings
  Appendix 4. Command line return codes
  Appendix 5. Configuring interaction with Kaspersky Anti-Virus for Linux Mail Server
Sources of information about Kaspersky Endpoint Security
Glossary
  Active key
  Active policy
  Administration group
  Administration Server
  Application activation
  Application databases
  Application settings
  Database of malicious web addresses
  Database of phishing web addresses
  Exclusion
  False positive
  File mask
  Group policy
  Group task
  Infected object
  Integration Server
  Kaspersky update servers
                                                             16
  License
  License certificate
  Light Agent
  Object disinfection
  Policy
  Proxy server
  Reserve key
  SIEM system
  Startup objects
  Subscription
  SVM
  Trusted device
Information about third-party code
Trademark notices




                                     17
Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux
Help

     What's new

What's new in Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux




     Hardware and software requirements

Hardware and software requirements of the application




     Comparison of features

   Comparison of application features across different licenses

   Special considerations of using the application in Light Agent mode




     Getting started

   Quick guide to installation and initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security for Linux   (the application is
   used in standard mode)

   Updating the application from a previous version

   Preparing to install the application

   Installation and initial configuration of the application

   Updating application databases and modules on the command line during initial configuration

   Updating application databases on the command line using the predefined update task (after initial
   configuration)

   Getting started using Kaspersky Security Center




                                                           18
  Licensing

Application licensing

Application activation and license key management

Activating the application during initial configuration on the command line

Activating the application and managing license keys on the command line (after initial configuration)

Activating the application using Kaspersky Security Center




  Monitoring & Reporting

Viewing the protection status of a device and information about application performance

Viewing information about the operation of an application in the command line

Viewing events and reports




  Data provision and protection of personal information

Data provision




  Additional features

Configuring settings for using the application in Light Agent mode

Advanced configuration of the application

Using Kaspersky Security Network

Backup

Integration with Detection and Response solutions




  Optimizing operating system resource consumption

Resource consumption optimization

                                                     19
 Contact Technical Support

Troubleshooting

Contact Technical Support




                             20
Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux
Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux ("Kaspersky Endpoint Security," "Application") designed to protect
devices running Linux® operating systems against various types of threats, including network and scam attacks.

The application allows you to protect both physical devices and virtual machines. You can use Kaspersky Endpoint
Security as part of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent to protect virtual machines running Linux
guest operating systems.


  The application is not intended for industrial processes that use automated control systems. To protect
  devices in such systems, we recommend using Kaspersky Industrial CyberSecurity for Linux Nodes.


The following functional components and tasks of the application provide the main functions of device protection
and control:

   File Threat Protection prevents infection of the file system on the user device. The File Threat Protection
   component starts automatically when Kaspersky Endpoint Security is launched and scans all files that are
   opened, saved, and started in real time.
   You can also scan protected devices on demand using the following scan tasks:

      Malware Scan. The application scans for the presence of malware in file system objects located on local
      disks of the device, as well as mounted and shared resources, which are accessed via SMB and NFS
      protocols. You can use this task to perform a full or custom scan of the device.

      Critical Areas Scan. The application scans boot sectors, startup objects, process memory, and kernel
      memory.

   Removable Drives Scan. The Removable Drives Scan component allows you to monitor the connection of
   removable drives to the device in real time and scan a removable drive and its boot sectors for malware.
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security can scan the following removable drives: CDs, DVDs, Blu-ray discs, flash drives
   (including USB modems), external hard drives, and floppy disks.

   Container Scan. The Container Scan component allows you to scan namespaces and running containers for
   malware in real time. Integration with Docker container management system, CRI-O framework, and Podman
   and runc utilities is supported. You can use the Container Scan task to scan containers and images on demand.

   Web Threat Protection. The Web Threat Protection component allows you to scan inbound traffic, prevent
   downloads of malicious files from the Internet, and block phishing, adware, and other malicious websites.
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security can scan encrypted connections.

   Network Threat Protection. The Network Threat Protection component allows you to scan inbound network
   traffic for activity that is typical for network attacks.

   Firewall Management. The Firewall Management component allows you to monitor the firewall settings of the
   operating system and filter all network activity in accordance with the network packet rules that you have
   configured.

   Anti-Cryptor. The Anti-Cryptor component allows you to scan remote devices' calls to files located in local
   directories with network access via SMB/NFS protocols and protect files from remote malicious encryption.




                                                       21
   Device Control. The Device Control component allows you to manage user access to the devices that are
   installed on or connected to the client device (for example, hard drives, cameras, or Wi-Fi modules). This lets
   you protect the client device from infection when external devices are connected, and prevent data loss or
   leaks. User access to devices is governed by access regimes and access rules that you have configured.

   Application Control. The Application Control component allows you to manage the launch of applications on
   user devices. This reduces the risk of device infection by restricting access to applications. Application
   launching is regulated by the Application Control rules that you have configured.

   Inventory. The Inventory task provides information about all applications executable files stored on the client
   devices. This information can be useful, for example, for creating Application Control rules.

   Web Control. The Web Control component controls user access to web resources. This allows you to reduce
   traffic consumption and reduce inappropriate use of working time. If a user tries to open a website to which
   access is restricted by Web Control, Kaspersky Endpoint Security blocks access or displays a warning.

   Behavior Detection. The Behavior Detection component allows you to monitor for any malicious activity from
   applications in the operating system. When malicious activity is detected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can
   terminate the process of the application that performs malicious activity.

   System Integrity Monitoring allows you to track changes to files and directories of the operating system. The
   System Integrity Monitoring component monitors the actions performed with objects from the monitoring
   scope specified in the component settings in real time. You can use the System Integrity Check task to check
   the integrity of the system on demand. The check is performed by comparing the current states of objects
   included in the monitoring scope with their initial states, which were previously established as a baseline.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows you to detect infected objects and neutralize the threats detected in them.
For this, the application can use:

   Application databases to detect and disinfect infected files. During the scan process, the application analyzes
   each file for the presence of a threat: it compares the file code with the code of a specific threat and looks for
   possible matches.

   Kaspersky Security Network. The use of data from Kaspersky Security Network ensures faster responses
   by Kaspersky Endpoint Security to various threats, improves the performance of some protection components,
   and reduces the likelihood of false positives.

Prior to disinfection or removal, Kaspersky Endpoint Security saves backup copies of files in the Backup located on
the device. If after disinfection, you partially or completely lose access to important information in a disinfected
file, you can restore the file from the copy.


  While performing scan tasks, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can disinfect and delete files that are protected
  from modification: files with the 'immutable' and 'append-only' attributes and files in directories with the
  'immutable' and 'append-only' attributes. Backup stores copies of these files that were created before
  disinfection or deletion. You can restore files from backup copies, if necessary. When scan tasks are
  completed, the 'immutable' and 'append-only' attributes of disinfected files are reset.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security can operate in Notify-only mode. Notify-only mode is an operation mode for the
application in which, if a threat is detected, application components and tasks do not attempt to disinfect or
delete malicious objects, deny access or block the activity of applications. Instead, the application only informs the
user about the detected threat.




                                                        22
Kaspersky Endpoint Security supports integration with other Kaspersky solutions to expand the capabilities of the
application:

   Integration with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response enables continuous search, detection and
   elimination of threats aimed at your organization.

   Integration with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform ensures protection of the organization's IT
   infrastructure and rapid detection of threats such as zero-day attacks, targeted attacks and advanced
   persistent threats.

   Integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum protects the organization’s IT
   infrastructure from threats such as exploits, ransomware, fileless attacks and attackers' use of legitimate
   system tools to harm devices or data.

   Integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform enables the receipt, processing and
   storage of information security events, data analysis and correlation, search by events, and the creation of
   notifications about the detection of indications of information security threats.

To keep the application up to date, additional application functions are provided:

   Activating the application with a key file or activation code.


     If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, activation is
     performed on the Protection Server (a component of Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization
     Light Agent).


   Updating the databases and application modules from Kaspersky update servers, via the Administration Server,
   or from a user-specified source on schedule and on demand.


     If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the
     application receives updates of databases and application modules from the Protection Server (a
     component of Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent).


   User access control for the application functions according to the user roles.

   Notification of the administrator about events that occurred while the application was running.

   Integrity check of application components using the integrity check tool.

You can manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security using the following methods:

   Using Kaspersky Security Center through the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console, Kaspersky Security
   Center Cloud Console, or the Administration Console.

   Using control commands from the command line.




                                                         23
   Using a graphical user interface.


     If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, Kaspersky
     Security Center must be used to manage the application. The application cannot be managed using
     Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console or the graphical user interface.



  The update functionality (including anti-virus signature updates and code base updates), as well as the KSN
  functionality may not be available in the application in the territory of the USA.




About Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage modes
You can use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in one of the following modes:

   In standard mode to protect workstations and servers ("Standard mode"). Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used
   as a standalone application for protecting devices running Linux operating systems.

   In Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments as part of Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for
   Virtualization Light Agent ("Light Agent mode"). Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used as the Light Agent
   component of the Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent solution to protect virtual
   machines running Linux guest operating systems.

The application is used in Standard mode by default.

If you want to use the application in Light Agent mode, you need to do the following:

 1. Install Kaspersky Endpoint Security on each virtual machine that needs to be protected using Kaspersky Hybrid
    Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent. You can also install the application on a virtual machine template.
   During installation, you must specify that the application will be used in Light Agent mode in one of the
   following ways:

      During the post-installation configuration of the application in interactive or automatic mode (if installed
      using the command line).

      In the properties of the application installation package or in the autoinstall.ini configuration file that is
      included in the installation package (if installing using Kaspersky Security Center).


     After Kaspersky Endpoint Security is installed, you cannot change the application usage mode.


   When selecting Light Agent mode, you can also configure the following settings for Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security in Light Agent mode:

      The role of the virtual machine that you want to protect, in the virtual infrastructure: server or workstation.
      The role of a virtual machine determines the license under which the application will be used on this virtual
      machine as well as the available functionality.

      VDI protection mode. It is recommended to enable this mode if you are installing the application on a virtual
      machine template that will be used to create temporary virtual machines. VDI protection mode optimizes
      the operation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security on temporary virtual machines.


                                                          24
 2. Configure the settings for connecting Light Agent to SVMs and the settings for connecting Light Agent to
    the Integration Server .
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode interacts with other components of the Kaspersky Hybrid
   Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent solution: the Integration Server and the Protection Server
   installed on the SVM (for more information, see the Kaspersky Endpoint Security for Virtualization Light Agent
   Help ). To interact with the Protection Server, Kaspersky Endpoint Security establishes and maintains a
   connection to the SVM on which this Protection Server is installed.
   A connection to the Integration Server is required if you want Light Agents to receive information about the
   SVM through the Integration Server, or if you want to protect the connection between the Protection Server
   and the Light Agent.
   You can configure the connection settings in the properties of a Kaspersky Endpoint Security policy using
   Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console or using Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

You can get information about application operation in Light Agent mode, as well as information about the
connection to the Integration Server and SVMs, by using the following application commands:

   kesl-control --ksvla-info

   kesl-control --viis-info

   kesl-control --svm-info

Information about the application usage mode is displayed in Kaspersky Security Center in the properties of
Kaspersky Endpoint Security on the managed device in the Components section. Information is displayed in the
Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments line as follows:

   The Running status means that the application is being used in Light Agent mode.

   The Not installed status means that the application is being used in Standard mode.


About activating the application in Light Agent mode

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode, the application does not need to be activated
separately. You activate all components of the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent solution at the
same time. Activation is performed on the Protection Server side (a component of Kaspersky Security for
Virtualization Light Agent) by adding the license key on the SVM. For more details, refer to the Help for Kaspersky
Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent .


  The main license of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent may not include the additional
  functionality of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application (for example, the Integration with Kaspersky
  Detection and Response solutions). In this case, you also need to add to the SVM a license key to activate the
  additional functionality.


After activating the solution and connecting the Light Agent to the SVM, the Protection Server component sends
license information to the Light Agent. When selecting an SVM to connect to, Light Agent considers, among other
settings, the type of license key added to the SVM. The Light Agent does not connect to the SVM if the type of
key added to the SVM does not match the role of the protected virtual machine in the virtual infrastructure (server
or workstation). For more information about the special considerations involved in connecting the Light Agent to
the SVM, please refer to the Help for Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent .




                                                        25
You can remotely view information about the license under which Light Agent for Linux is being used with the help
of Kaspersky Security Center or on a protected virtual machine with Light Agent using the command line.


  License keys cannot be managed using the Add Key task or via the Kaspersky Endpoint Security command for
  adding and deleting license keys.



About updating application databases and modules in Light Agent mode

Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode uses special anti-malware databases that are required for the
application to work as part of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent. Kaspersky Endpoint Security
receives application database and module updates from the Protection Server. For more details, refer to the Help
for Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent .

Databases and software modules on protected virtual machines are updated using a special Update local task of
Kaspersky Endpoint Security, where the folder on the SVM is specified as the update source. The update task
starts automatically. You cannot delete this task or change its settings.


  Update sources other than a folder on SVMs are not supported. The use of group update tasks is not
  supported.


The last anti-malware database update is also rolled back on the Protection Server side. After rolling back the
application database and module update on the SVMs, a special Update local task is automatically started on the
protected virtual machine. Completing the task causes the Light Agent to return to using the previous set of anti-
malware databases.


  The use of Rollback local and group tasks of Kaspersky Endpoint Security is not supported.



Other features of using the application in Light Agent mode

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode:

   Application management using Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console and the graphical user interface is
   not available.

   The use of cloud databases is not supported.

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security interacts with KSN servers using a KSN proxy server. Direct communication with
   KSN is not supported.

   The use of a proxy server for the application is not supported when connecting to the Integration Server,
   SVMs, or KSN servers.




Distribution kit
You can download the files that are included in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution kit, as well as the files
needed to remotely install the application using Kaspersky Security Center, on the Kaspersky website .

                                                         26
The Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution kit includes the following files:

   kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.i386.rpm, kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_i386.deb
   Contain the main application files. Packages can be installed to 32-bit operating systems based on the type of
   package manager.

   kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.x86_64.rpm, kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_amd64.deb
   Contain the main application files. Packages can be installed to 64-bit operating systems based on the type of
   package manager.

   kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.aarch64.rpm, kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_arm64.deb
   Contain the main application files. Packages for the relevant package manager can be installed on 64-bit
   operating systems for the Arm® architecture.

   kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.i386.rpm, kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_i386.deb
   Contain the files of the application graphical user interface. Packages can be installed to 32-bit operating
   systems based on the type of package manager.

   kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.x86_64.rpm, kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_amd64.deb
   Contain the files of the application graphical user interface. Packages can be installed to 64-bit operating
   systems based on the type of package manager.

   kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.aarch64.rpm, kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_arm64.deb
   Contain the files of the application graphical user interface. Packages for the relevant package manager can be
   installed on 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture.

   kesl-12.2.0.<build number>.zip
   Contains the files used for remote application installation using Kaspersky Security Center, including license.
   <language ID> and ksn_license.<language ID> files.


     Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent is not included in the distribution kit. You can download it on the
     application download page in the Kaspersky Security Center section.


   ksn_license.<language ID>
   This file contains the text of the Statement on Kaspersky Security Network.

   license.<language ID>
   This file contains the text of the End User License Agreement. The End User License Agreement specifies the
   terms for using the application.


  Editing configuration files of the application on your on using means not described in the application
  documentation or not recommended by Technical Support may cause poor performance and failures of the
  application and operating system, reduced protection of your device, inaccessible and corrupted data, as well
  as the sending of additional statistics to KSN getting turned on.




Hardware and software requirements
This section contains the hardware and software requirements for Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
                                                         27
Hardware requirements
Kaspersky Endpoint Security has the following hardware requirements:


Minimum hardware requirements

   CPU with AMD64 architecture, 2 GHz or more, two or more cores, and support for the SSE2 instruction set.

   Swap partition of at least 1 GB

   * 1 GB of RAM available to the application for 32-bit operating systems (2 GB of RAM available to the application
   for 64-bit operating systems).

   4 GB of free hard disk space for installation of the application and storage of temporary and log files
   Additional disk space is required to store trace files and application memory dump files.
   When scanning archives and compound objects with ScanArchived=Yes and ScanSfxArchived=Yes (by
   default, these are set to Yes for scan tasks and No for File Threat Protection), File Threat Protection and scan
   tasks require additional disk space depending on the type and unpacked size of such objects.
   We recommend making sure there is enough free space in the /tmp directory for scanning archives and
   compound objects. You can also limit the size (in the archived state) of archives that can be scanned by
   specifying the SizeLimit setting for each task.

   When using a graphical user interface, the monitor must be capable of displaying windows 1000 pixels wide and
   600 pixels tall (if screen scaling is applied, these dimensions are also scaled).

   If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, a virtual network
   interface with a bandwidth of 100 Mbps


Minimum hardware requirements for the Arm architecture

   Armv8.2-A Kunpeng 920 or Armv8-A Baikal-M (BE-M1000) CPU or m-TrusT Terminal platform

   Swap partition of at least 1 GB

   2 GB of RAM available to the application

   3 GB of free hard disk space for installation of the application and storage of temporary and log files
   Additional disk space is required to store trace files and application memory dump files.
   When scanning archives and compound objects with ScanArchived=Yes and ScanSfxArchived=Yes (by
   default, these are set to Yes for scan tasks and No for File Threat Protection), File Threat Protection and scan
   tasks require additional disk space depending on the type and unpacked size of such objects.




                                                        28
   We recommend making sure there is enough free space in the /tmp directory for scanning archives and
   compound objects. You can also limit the size (in the archived state) of archives that can be scanned by
   specifying the SizeLimit setting for each task.

   When using a graphical user interface, the monitor must be capable of displaying windows 1000 pixels wide and
   600 pixels tall (if screen scaling is applied, these dimensions are also scaled).


  Using Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments is not supported on
  operating systems based on the Arm architecture.



  For information on licenses and available functionality for solutions based on Arm architecture, please
  contact your service provider in your region.




Software requirements
To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security, one of the following operating systems must be installed on the device:

   32-bit operating systems:

      Debian GNU/Linux 11.0 and later.

      Debian GNU/Linux 12.0 and later.

      Mageia™ 4.


        Integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
        Response (KATA) is not supported on devices running the Mageia 4 operating system.


      ALT 8 SP Workstation (8.4).

      ALT 8 SP Server (8.4).

   Supported 64-bit operating systems:

      AlmaLinux OS 8.0 and later.

      AlmaLinux OS 9.0 and later.

      AlterOS® 7.5.

      Amazon™ Linux 2.

      Astra Linux Common Edition 2.12.

      Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-01 (operational update 1.5).

      Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-01 (operational update 1.6).

      Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-01 (operational update 1.7).

                                                       29
Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-01 (operational update 1.8).

Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-03 (operational update 7.6).

Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-16 (release 1) (operational update 1.6).

Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-17 (operational update 1.7.3)

Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10015-37 (operational update 7.7).


   Using Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments is not
   supported on devices running Astra Linux operating systems in mandatory access control and closed
   software environment modes.



The Astra Linux operating system in the "Mobile" mode is only supported on tablet computers (tablets) in
desktop mode.


CentOS 7.2 and later.

CentOS Stream 8.

CentOS Stream 9.

Debian GNU/Linux 11.0 and later.

Debian GNU/Linux 12.0 and later.

EMIAS 1.0 and later.

EulerOS 2.0 SP10.

Fedora Linux 41.

Kylin 10.

Linux Mint 21.1 and later.

Linux Mint 22.0 and later.

Mostech 12.

openSUSE Leap 15.0 and later.

Oracle Linux 7.3 and later.

Oracle Linux 8.0 and later.

Oracle Linux 9.0 and later.

Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.2 and later.

Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8.0 and later.

                                                  30
Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9.0 and later.

Rocky Linux 8.5 and later.

Rocky Linux 9.0 and later.

SberLinux 9.0.1 and later.

SberOS 3.3.3.

SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 12.5 or later.

SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 15 or later.

Ubuntu® 22.04 LTS.

Ubuntu 24.04 LTS.

ALT 8 SP Workstation (8.4).

ALT 8 SP Server (8.4).

ALT Education 10.1.

ALT SP Workstation release 10.

ALT SP Workstation release 10.1.

ALT SP Workstation release 10.2.

ALT SP Server release 10.

ALT SP Server release 10.1.

Atlant, Alcyone build, version 2022.02.

GosLinux 7.17.

GosLinux 7.2.

M OS 12 Server.

MOS OS 15.4 Arbat.

MSVSphere Workstation 9.2 and later.

MSVSphere Server 9.2 and later.

MES OS 12 V.

MES OS 12 Panel.

MES OS 12 Desktop.

OSnova 2.9 and later.

                                              31
    RED OS® 7.3.

    RED OS 8.0.

    ROSA Cobalt 7.9.

    ROSA Chrome 12.

    SintezM-Client 8.6.

    SintezM-Server 8.6.

 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture:

    Astra Linux Special Edition RUSB.10152-02 (operational update 4.7).

    CentOS Stream 9.

    EulerOS 2.0 SP10.

    SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 15.

    Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.

    ALT SP Workstation release 10.

    ALT SP Server release 10.

    RED OS 7.3.

    RED OS 8.0.


   Using Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments is not supported
   on operating systems for the Arm architecture.



   For information on licenses and available functionality for solutions based on Arm architecture, please
   contact your service provider in your region.



Due to technical limitations of fanotify, the application does not support the following file systems: autofs,
binfmt_misc, cgroup, configfs, debugfs, devpts, devtmpfs, fuse, fuse.gvfsd-fuse, gfs2, gvfs, hugetlbfs,
mqueue, nfsd, proc, parsecfs, pipefs, pstore, usbfs, rpc_pipefs, securityfs, selinuxfs, sysfs, tracefs.




                                                      32
Supported versions of Kaspersky Security Center
Kaspersky Endpoint Security is compatible with the following Kaspersky Security Center versions:

   Kaspersky Security Center 14 Windows. Kaspersky Endpoint Security can be administered through
   Administration Console using the MMC management plug-in and through Kaspersky Security Center Web
   Console using the web management plug-in.

   Kaspersky Security Center 14.2 Windows. Kaspersky Endpoint Security can be administered through
   Administration Console using the MMC management plug-in and through Kaspersky Security Center Web
   Console using the web management plug-in.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Windows. Kaspersky Endpoint Security can be administered through
   Administration Console using the MMC management plug-in and through Kaspersky Security Center Web
   Console using the web management plug-in.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15 Linux. The administration web plug-in can be used to administer Kaspersky
   Endpoint Security through Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Linux. The administration web plug-in can be used to administer Kaspersky
   Endpoint Security through Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.2 Linux. The administration web plug-in can be used to administer Kaspersky
   Endpoint Security through Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments (as part of Kaspersky
Security for Virtualization Light Agent), we recommend to manage the application using one of the following
versions of Kaspersky Security Center.

   Kaspersky Security Center 14.2 Windows.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Windows.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15 Linux.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Linux.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.2 Linux.

Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent is required to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security through Kaspersky
Security Center.


  Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent is not included in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution kit.
  You can download it on the application download page in the Kaspersky Security Center section.


If you are using application integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component,
we recommend using the following versions of Kaspersky Security Center to manage the application:

   Kaspersky Security Center 14.2 Windows.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Windows.

                                                      33
   Kaspersky Security Center 15 Linux.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Linux.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.2 Linux.

If you are using application integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
component, we recommend using the following versions of Kaspersky Security Center to manage the application:

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Windows.

   Kaspersky Security Center 15.2 Linux.



Supported versions of Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform
Kaspersky Endpoint Security is compatible with the following versions of Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform:

   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform 6.0.

   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform 6.1.

   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform 7.0.

For more details about the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, please refer to the Kaspersky Anti
Targeted Attack Platform Help .




                                                      34
What's new
Kaspersky Endpoint Security now boasts the following features and improvements:

   Added support for integration with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA), a component of the
   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, which protects the internal corporate network and allows
   sending information about events occurring on devices (telemetry) to a Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack
   Platform server with the Central Node component (hereinafter also referred to as the NDR server).

   Added support for integration with KATA Sandbox, a component of the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack
   Platform solution, which allows you to analyze and scan objects to detect malicious activity and indicators of
   targeted attacks on the corporate IT infrastructure using special servers with deployed virtual images of
   operating systems.

   Added support for integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform, a comprehensive
   software solution that combines the following functionality: receiving, processing, and storing information
   security events; analyzing and correlating incoming data; searching received events, and creating notifications
   about detection of indicators of information security threats.

   Expanded functionality of integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), a component
   of the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution:

      New object execution prevention functionality.

      New file quarantining functionality.

      Expanded information about events on devices (telemetry).

   Expanded Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration functionality:

      New object execution prevention functionality.

      New file quarantining functionality.

      Now you can exclude a process from network isolation by process name.

   Now you can use the Cloud Sandbox technology, which allows detecting complex threats on the device. The
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security application automatically sends detected files to Cloud Sandbox for analysis.
   Cloud Sandbox runs these files in an isolated environment to detect malicious activity and decides on the
   reputation of these files.

   Now you can view statistics for the most frequently scanned files and applications, as well as a list of mount
   points detected on the protected device. To improve performance, you can now exclude the files that are most
   frequently scanned by the File Threat Protection component, the paths to applications that are most
   frequently scanned by the Behavior Detection component, and the mount points detected on the device.

   Now you can collect application performance metrics that can help analyze the impact of Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security on operating system performance.

   Improved Firewall Management component. Now you can specify multiple IP addresses or IP address ranges for
   a network packet rule.




                                                       35
New mechanism for tracking operating system freezes. This mechanism checks for freezes of some system
functions, one such function being the execve function. Every three seconds, the wdserver Watchdog server
process starts another wdserver process, in which it calls these system functions (an execve function call
starts at least one additional wdserver process). If wdserver detects a system function freeze, the Watchdog
server overload restarts the kesl process.

Now you can configure the display of pop-up notifications when managing the graphical user interface of the
application. You can now enable or disable the display of pop-up notifications in the GUI using the Web
Console, Administration Console, or command line.

Improved command line options for task scheduling. Now you can configure a task to be stopped when it
reaches maximum execution time.

Changed the status of the "padlock" attribute when creating a Kaspersky Security Center policy profile. Now,
when creating a profile, all "padlocks" are open by default, which means that by default, profile settings do not
override the settings of the "base" policy.

Added an alternative mechanism for getting system telemetry on 64-bit operating systems (with kernel
versions 5.3 or later with eBPF with BTF support), which allows freeing up the resources of the auditd kernel
audit subsystem. The application will work with eBPF automatically if the operating system meets the specified
requirements.

Dates and times in all management plug-ins are displayed in a uniform format conforming to RFC 3339, for
example, 2023-12-25 23:55:59.

The list of supported operating systems has been updated.




                                                     36
Preparing to install Kaspersky Endpoint
Security
General actions

Before starting installation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you need to perform the following actions:

   Check that your device meets the hardware and software requirements of the application.

   Be sure third-party anti-virus software is not installed on your device.

   Be sure that Kaspersky Endpoint Agent for Linux is not installed on your device. If Kaspersky Endpoint Agent
   for Linux is installed, during the installation process you will see a message about the need to manually remote
   it.

   Be sure that an interpreter for Perl version 5.10 or higher is installed on your device. If the Perl language
   interpreter is not installed, install the perl-5.10 package (or a later version) or the perl-base package, depending
   on your package manager.

   If you want to use the SELinux access control system, you need to make sure that the semanage utility is
   installed on the operating system. If the utility is not installed, install the policycoreutils-python or
   policycoreutils-python-utils package, depending on the package manager.

   If you want to use the graphical user interface, you need to make sure that the dependencies of the GUI
   package are satisfied on your device. If the device is in an isolated network segment and does not have access
   to the repositories of the package manager, we recommend checking the list of dependencies on a reference
   device (libice6, libsm6, libx11-6, libx11-xcb1, libxcb-icccm4, libxcb-image0, libxcb-keysyms1, libxcb-randr0, libxcb-
   render-util0, libxcb-render0, libxcb-shape0, libxcb-shm0, libxcb-sync1, libxcb-xfixes0, libxcb-xinerama0, libxcb-
   xkb1, libxcb1, libxi6, libxml2, zlib1g), and then downloading and distributing the packages to all devices before
   installing the GUI.

   On devices with operating systems that do not support fanotify technology, make sure that the following are
   installed:

      Packages for compiling applications and running tasks (gcc, binutils, glibc, glibc-devel, make);

      Package with header files of the operating system kernel for compiling Kaspersky Endpoint Security
      modules.

   Install one of the following packages on your device depending on the operating system:

      On devices running the SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 15 operating system, the insserv-compat package
      must be installed.

      On devices running the Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8 or RED OS operating system, install the perl-Getopt-
      Long package.

      On devices running the Red Hat Enterprise Linux or RED OS operating systems, install the perl-File-Copy
      package. This package is required for the initial application configuration script to work, but may be absent
      by default.



                                                          37
   By default, Astra Linux operating systems block ptrace (Disable ptrace capability), which may affect the
   operation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security. For Kaspersky Endpoint Security to work correctly, unblock ptrace
   when installing Astra Linux. If Astra Linux is already installed, see the Astra Linux Help Center website for
   instructions on how to enable/disable this mode (Configuring protection and blocking mechanisms in the
   Blocking ptrace section).

   For the Firewall Management, Web Threat Protection and Network Threat Protection components to work, the
   iptables utility needs to be installed on your device.

   For the Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in to work, Microsoft® Visual C++® 2015
   Redistributable Update 3 RC (see https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=52685 ) must
   be installed on device where Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server is installed.

   For the application to run correctly, make sure that the root account is the owner of the following directories
   and that only the owner has the right to write to them: /var, /var/opt, /var/opt/kaspersky, /var/log/kaspersky,
   /opt, /opt/kaspersky, /usr/bin, /usr/lib, /usr/lib64.

   Make sure that file descriptor limits recommended by the operating system vendor are configured in the
   operating system. To check the limit, run the command cat /proc/sys/fs/file-max. When the application
   is running, the operating system may use significantly more descriptors. In general, we recommend disabling the
   file limit by specifying fs.file-max=9223372036854775807 in the /etc/sysctl.conf file. After changing the
   value of this setting, you must restart the operating system.


Additional actions before installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode

If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments (as part of
Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent), you must perform the following additional actions
before starting the installation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   Make sure that the following packages are installed on the virtual machines that you want to protect, depending
   on the virtual infrastructure in which Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent is
   deployed:

      In a Microsoft Hyper-V infrastructure, the Integration Services package must be installed on the virtual
      machines.

      In a VMware vSphere infrastructure, the VMware Tools package must be installed on the virtual machines.

      In a XenServer infrastructure, XenTools must be installed on the virtual machines.

      In a HUAWEI FusionSphere infrastructure, the HUAWEI Tools package must be installed on the virtual
      machines.

      In an infrastructure based on KVM, OpenStack, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), TIONIX Cloud Platform, Astra
      Linux, or Viola Virtualization Server, QEMU Guest Agent must be installed on virtual machines.

   Make sure that the settings of network equipment or software that monitor traffic between virtual machines
   allow network traffic to pass through the ports that are used for interaction between Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security in Light Agent mode and other components of Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization
   Light Agent. For more details about the solution components, please refer to the Help for Kaspersky Hybrid
   Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent .




                                                        38
Ports used for operation of the Light Agent

     Port and                  Direction                                             Purpose and description
     protocol

  7271 TCP          From the Light Agent to the     For interaction between the Light Agent and the Integration Server.
                    Integration Server.

  8000 UDP          From the SVM to the Light       For transmitting information about available SVMs to Light Agents using a list of SVM
                    Agent.                          addresses.

  8000 UDP          From the Light Agent to SVMs.   For the Light Agent to receive information about the status of the SVM.

  11111 TCP         From the Light Agent to SVMs.   For transmitting service requests (for example, to obtain license information) from the
                                                    Light Agent to the Protection Server when the connection is unprotected.

  11112 TCP         From the Light Agent to SVMs.   For transmitting service requests (for example, to obtain license information) from the
                                                    Light Agent to the Protection Server when the connection is protected.

  9876 TCP          From the Light Agent to SVMs.   For forwarding file scan requests from the Light Agent to the Protection Server when the
                                                    connection is unprotected.

  9877 TCP          From the Light Agent to SVMs.   For transmitting file scan requests from the Light Agent to the Protection Server when
                                                    the connection is protected.

  80 TCP            From the Light Agent to SVMs.   For updating databases and application modules of the solution on the Light Agent.

  15000 UDP         From Kaspersky Security         For managing the Protection Server via Kaspersky Security Center.
                    Center to SVMs.

  15000 UDP         From Kaspersky Security         For managing the Light Agent via Kaspersky Security Center.
                    Center to Light Agents.

  13000 TCP         From the Light Agent to         For managing the Light Agent via Kaspersky Security Center when the connection is
                    Kaspersky Security Center.      protected.

  14000 TCP         From the Light Agent to         For managing Light Agent via Kaspersky Security Center when the connection is
                    Kaspersky Security Center.      unprotected.




                                                                39
Installation and initial configuration of
Kaspersky Endpoint Security
You need to prepare for installation before installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

The scenarios below describe how to install and perform initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security, how
to install and configure Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent and how to install Kaspersky Endpoint Security
management plug-ins. The installation scenario depends on the mode in which you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint
Security.


Standard mode

If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in standard mode, the installation procedure involves the following
steps:

   1   Installation and initial configuration of the Network Agent

       If you plan to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky Security Center, install and configure
       Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent on the protected device.

  2    Installing the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-in

       If you plan to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky Security Center, install the Kaspersky
       Endpoint Security management plug-in. Depending on the console used to manage Kaspersky Security Center,
       the following management plug-ins are used:

          The Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in lets you manage the application using Kaspersky
          Security Center Cloud Console and Kaspersky Security Center Web Console. The web plug-in is installed on
          the device that has the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console installed.

          The Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration MMC plug-in lets you manage the application using
          Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console. The MMC plug-in is installed on the device where
          Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed.

  3    Installing application packages and graphical user interface

       Kaspersky Endpoint Security is distributed in the DEB and RPM packages. There are separate packages for the
       application and for the graphical user interface. Install Kaspersky Endpoint Security and, if necessary, the
       graphical user interface from packages in the appropriate format.

       You can perform installation in one of the following ways:

          Using Kaspersky Security Center.

          Using the command line.

  4    Initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

       The application needs initial configuration to prepare it for operation and enable the protection of the client
       device.

       If you installed Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky Security Center, the initial configuration was
       performed automatically during installation in accordance with the parameters specified in the installation
       package. After completing the installation, go through the Getting started procedure.



                                                           40
      If you installed Kaspersky Endpoint Security using the command line, run the initial configuration script or
      perform the initial configuration in automatic mode after installation is completed.


        If initial configuration of the application has not been completed on a device, you cannot use or update the
        application on that device.




Light Agent mode


  Using Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments is not supported on
  operating systems based on the Arm architecture.


If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the
installation procedure involves the following steps:

  1   Installation and initial configuration of the Network Agent

      Install and configure Kaspersky Security Center Agent on virtual machines and virtual machine templates.

      If you are installing Network Agent on a template that will be used to create temporary virtual machines, it is
      recommended to configure settings that allow you to optimize performance on temporary virtual machines. For
      more details about installing on a virtual machine template, refer to the Help for Kaspersky Security for
      Virtualization Light Agent .

  2   Installing the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-in

      Install a Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-in. Depending on the console used to manage Kaspersky
      Security Center, the following management plug-ins are used:

         The Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in lets you manage the application using Kaspersky
         Security Center Cloud Console and Kaspersky Security Center Web Console. The web plug-in is installed on
         the device that has Kaspersky Security Center Web Console installed.

         The Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration MMC plug-in lets you manage the application using
         Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console. The MMC plug-in is installed on the device where
         Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed.

  3   Installation of application packages and initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

      Kaspersky Endpoint Security is distributed in the DEB and RPM packages. Install Kaspersky Endpoint Security
      from a package of the required format. There are separate packages for the application and for the graphical
      user interface.


        The graphical user interface is not supported if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to
        protect virtual environments.


      You can install the application in one of the following ways:

         Using Kaspersky Security Center.




                                                           41
         Before starting the installation, you must perform the initial configuration of the application in one of the
         following ways:

             In the properties of the installation package on the Settings tab (this method is available only in
             Kaspersky Security Center Web Console).

             In the configuration file that is included in the installation package

         You must select the Light Agent mode (KSVLA_MODE=yes in the configuration file). If you are installing
         Kaspersky Endpoint Security on a template from which temporary virtual machines will be created, we
         recommend to also enable VDI protection mode to optimize the performance of the application on
         temporary virtual machines (VDI_MODE=yes in the configuration file).

         Using the command line. If installation is performed using the command line, the application usage mode is
         selected during initial configuration.

  4   Initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

      The application needs initial configuration to prepare it for operation and enable the protection of the client
      device.

      If you installed Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky Security Center, the initial configuration was
      performed automatically during installation in accordance with the parameters specified in the installation
      package. After completing the installation, go through the Getting started procedure.

      If you installed Kaspersky Endpoint Security using the command line, run the initial configuration script or
      perform the initial configuration in automatic mode after installation is completed. During initial configuration,
      select Light Agent mode in one of the following ways:

         Enter yes in the Specifying the application usage step of the initial configuration script.

         Specify the KSVLA_MODE=yes setting in the initial configuration file.

      If you install Kaspersky Endpoint Security on a template that will be used to create temporary virtual machines, it
      is recommended to also configure the setting for optimizing the operation on temporary virtual machines. For
      more details about installing on a virtual machine template, refer to the Help for Kaspersky Security for
      Virtualization Light Agent .


        If initial configuration of the application has not been completed on a device, you cannot use or update the
        application on that device.




The installation and initial configuration of Kaspersky
Security Center Network Agent
Network Agent facilitates the client device's connection with the Kaspersky Security Center Administration
Server. It must be installed on every client device that will be connected to Kaspersky Security Center, the
centralized remote management system.


  Before you begin installing the Network Agent on Linux devices, you must perform some preparatory steps.
  For instructions on how to prepare devices for installing Network Agent, please refer to the Kaspersky
  Security Center Help. The procedure depends on the operating system.




                                                            42
You can perform the installation and initial configuration of Network Agent:

   Remotely from the administrator's workstation using the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console or the
   Administration Console. The Network Agent installation package is used for remote installation.

   Using the command line:

      In silent mode with an answer file. An answer file is a text file that contains a custom set of settings for the
      installation and initial configuration of Network Agent. For a description of installation options and initial
      configuration of Network Agent, please refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help (the "Installing Network
      Agent for Linux in silent mode (with an answer file)" section).

      Interactively from an RPM or DEB package depending on your package manager. In this case, after
      installation, you need to perform the initial configuration of the Network Agent using a script.

For details on how to install Network Agent, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.




Installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security management
plug-ins
The following Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration plug-ins are used to manage Kaspersky Endpoint
Security using Kaspersky Security Center:

   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in lets you manage the application using Kaspersky
   Security Center Web Console and Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console.

   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration MMC plug-in lets you manage the application using Kaspersky
   Security Center Administration Console.

You can install administration plug-ins for different versions of Kaspersky Endpoint Security simultaneously. This
allows you to manage the application by using the policies created with different administration plug-in versions.

If you use the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console to manage the application, you can also convert
policies and tasks created using earlier versions of the management plug-in to newer versions.




Installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security web plug-in
The Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in must be installed on the device that has the Kaspersky
Security Center Web Console installed. The functionality of the web plug-in is available to all administrators who
have access to Kaspersky Security Center Web Console in a browser.




                                                        43
You can install the web plug-in as follows:

   Using the Quick Start Wizard for Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.
   Kaspersky Security Center Web Console automatically prompts you to run the Quick Start Wizard when
   connecting Kaspersky Security Center Web Console to the Administration Server for the first time. You can
   also run the Initial Configuration Wizard in the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console interface (Device
   discovery and deployment → Deployment and assignment → Quick Start Wizard). The Quick Start Wizard
   can also check if the installed web plug-ins are up to date and download the necessary updates. For more
   information on the Initial Configuration Wizard for Kaspersky Security Center Web Console, please refer to
   Kaspersky Security Center Help section.

   Manually, using a distribution kit from the list of Kaspersky Web plug-ins or from an external source.

To install the Kaspersky Endpoint Security web plug-in manually:

 1. In the main window of the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console, select Settings → Web plug-ins.
   A list of installed web plug-ins opens.

 2. Start the installation of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security web plug-in by one of the following ways:

      Installation from the list of Kaspersky web plug-ins:

        a. Click Add.
          A list of all available Kaspersky Web plug-ins opens. The list is updated automatically after new versions
          of web plug-ins are released.

        b. Find the Kaspersky Endpoint Security <version number> for Linux web plug-in in the list and click its
           name.

        c. In the window that opens with a description of the web plug-in, click the Install plug-in button.

       d. Wait for the installation to complete and click OK in the information window.

      Installation of the web plug-in from an external source (the archives required for installing the web plug-ins
      are included in the distribution kit):

        a. Click the Add from file button.

        b. In the window that opens, specify the path to the ZIP archive with the distribution kit for the web plug-in
           and the path to the signed file in TXT format. This file is in the archive with the web plug-in.

        c. Click Add.

       d. Wait for the installation to complete and click OK in the information window.

  The new plug-in is displayed in the list of installed web plug-ins (Settings → Web Plug-ins).



  If you select a language that is not included in Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution package in the
  properties of Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server, the License Agreement and the entire
  Kaspersky Security Center Web Console interface will be displayed in English.




                                                         44
Installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC plug-in
The Kaspersky Endpoint Security management MMC plug-in must be installed on the same device where the
Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed.


  Before installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in, make sure that Kaspersky Security
  Center and Redist C++ 2015 (Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Redistributable) are installed.


To install the MMC plug-in,

  on the device where the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed, run the executable file
  klcfginst.msi.


The file is included in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution kit.

After installation, the MMC management plug-in is displayed in the list of installed MMC management plug-ins in
the properties of the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server.

To view the list of installed management MMC plug-ins:

 1. In the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console tree, select the Administration Server <server
    name> node and open the Administration Server properties window in one of the following ways:

      using the Properties item in the Administration Server <server name> node context menu;

      by clicking the Administration Server properties link located in the workspace of the Administration
      Server <server name> node in the Administration Server section.

 2. In the list on the left, in the Advanced section, select the Information about the installed application
    management plug-ins section.
   In the right part of the window, the list of installed administration plug-ins displays the administration MMC
   plug-in for Kaspersky Endpoint Security: Kaspersky Endpoint Security <version number> for Linux.




Installing and initially configuring the application using
Kaspersky Security Center
You can install Kaspersky Endpoint Security on a client device remotely from the administrator's workstation using
the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console or the Administration Console.

Installation using Kaspersky Security Center involves the following steps:

 1. Creating an installation package.
   For the remote installation, Kaspersky Endpoint Security installation package is used. Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security installation package is common for all supported operating systems and processor architecture types.
   You can create the installation package using the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console or the
   Administration Console.


                                                          45
  You can specify the initial configuration settings using the autoinstall.ini configuration file included in the
  installation package, or in the properties of the installation package (this method is available only in the Web
  Console).


    You must manage initial configuration settings of the application if you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint
    Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments (as part of the Kaspersky Security for
    Virtualization Light Agent solution). The application is used in standard mode by default.


  If you plan to use the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application in standard mode, you can add the following to
  the installation package while creating it:

     License key for automatic activation of the application during installation

     Pre-downloaded application databases to avoid having to update the databases after installation

  You can also activate the application and update the databases as part of the getting started procedure


    If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, then
    activation of the application during installation and automatic license key distribution are not supported. If
    Kaspersky Endpoint Security receives information about the license from the Protection Server after
    connecting to the SVM; there is no need to activate Kaspersky Endpoint Security separately.


2. Deploying the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on devices in the corporate network.
  Kaspersky Security Center Web Console supports the following main deployment methods:

     Installing the application using the Protection Deployment Wizard.

     Installing the application using the remote installation task.

  The Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console supports the following main deployment methods:

     Installing the application using the Remote Installation Wizard.

     Installing the application using the remote installation task.

  For a description of the deployment procedures, see the Kaspersky Security Center Help.
  If necessary, you can view the application remote installation log by using remote diagnostics of the Kaspersky
  Security Center client device.

3. Getting started.
  Before using the application, you need to complete the initial configuration of the application and prepare the
  application for operation.


    If initial configuration of the application has not been completed on a device, you cannot use or update the
    application on that device.




                                                        46
To use Kaspersky Security Center to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed on client devices, you need to
put these devices in administration groups . Before starting Kaspersky Endpoint Security installation, you can
create Kaspersky Security Center administration groups to which you want to move the devices with Kaspersky
Endpoint Security installed, and configure the rules to automatically move the devices to these administration
groups. If rules for moving devices to the administration groups are not configured, Kaspersky Security Center
moves all the devices that have the Administration Agent installed and are connected to Administration Server to
the Unassigned devices list. In this case, you need to manually move computers to the administration groups (refer
to the Kaspersky Security Center Help for details).



Creating an installation package in the Web Console
In Kaspersky Security Center Web Console, you can create an installation package in one of the following ways:

   From an archive file that you have prepared previously.

   From a distribution kit hosted on Kaspersky servers.


  If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, you must
  perform the initial configuration of the application in the properties of the created installation package on the
  Settings tab. You can also perform the initial configuration of the application using the configuration file that
  is included in the installation package.


To prepare an archive for creating an installation package:

 1. Download the kesl.zip archive from the application download page . It is located in the Kaspersky Endpoint
    Security for Linux (Additional distribution → Files for Product remote installation).

 2. Unpack the kesl.zip archive to a folder accessible to Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server. Place
    the distribution files, that correspond to the type of operating system where you want to install the application
    and the type of its package manager, to the same folder:

      To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

          kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.i386.rpm (for 32-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_i386.deb (for 32-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.x86_64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_amd64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.aarch64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with rpm)

          kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_arm64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with dpkg)

      To install the graphical user interface of the application:

          kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.i386.rpm (for 32-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_i386.deb (for 32-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.x86_64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems with rpm)

                                                          47
         kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_amd64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems with dpkg)

         kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.aarch64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with
         rpm)

         kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_arm64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with
         dpkg)


        If you do not want to install the graphical user interface, do not add these files to the folder; this will
        make the installation package smaller.



        If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the
        graphical user interface is not supported.



    If you do not plan to install the graphical interface, disable it by editing the appropriate setting
    (USE_GUI=No) in the properties of the created installation package or in the autoinstall.ini configuration
    file. Otherwise, the installation will fail.


  If you want to use the created installation package with different operating systems or package managers,
  place the files for all the types of operating systems and package managers that you need in the directory.

3. If you plan to use the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application in standard mode and want to use pre-
   downloaded application databases:

   a. Place prepared archives with databases for all your operating system types into the folder.

   b. In initial configuration settings, disable the database update task after installing the application. You can
      configure the relevant setting in the properties of the created installation package or in the autoinstall.ini
      configuration file (UPDATE_EXECUTE=No). The autoinstall.ini file is located in the folder where you unpacked
      the kesl.zip archive.

4. If you want to perform the initial configuration of the application using a configuration file, open the
   autoinstall.ini configuration file and edit it as necessary.


    If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, you
    need to set KSVLA_MODE=Yes in the autoinstall.ini configuration file.



    The setting values in the autoinstall.ini file are case sensitive.


  You can also perform the initial configuration of the application later in the properties of the created installation
  package on the Settings tab.

5. Place all prepared files in an archive in ZIP, CAB, TAR, or TAR.GZ format with any name.




                                                          48
To create an installation package for Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Kaspersky Security Center Web Console:

 1. In the main Web Console window, select one of the following sections:

      Device discovery and deployment → Deployment and assignment → Installation packages.

      Operations → Repositories → Installation packages.

   A list of installation packages available on the Administration Server opens.

 2. Click Add.
   The wizard for creating an installation package will start. Follow the instructions of the Wizard.

 3. On the first page of the wizard, select the method for creating an installation package:

      Create an installation package from a file. The installation package will be created from an archive that you
      have prepared in advance. You need to select this option if you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in
      Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments.

      Create installation package for a Kaspersky application. The installation package will be created from a
      distribution package located on Kaspersky servers.


     Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console does not allow creation of installation packages from a file.


4. Depending on the selected package creation method:

      Specify the package name, click the Browse button, and specify the path to the archive that you have
      prepared for creating the installation package.

      Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution package. In the window on the right, read the information
      about the distribution package and click the Download and create installation package button. The
      installation package creation process starts.

 5. During creation of the installation package, accept the terms of the End User License Agreement and Privacy
    Policy. When prompted by the Wizard, read the License Agreement between you and Kaspersky and the
    Privacy Policy that describes the processing and transmission of data. To continue creating the installation
    package, you must confirm that you have read and accept the full terms of the End User License Agreement
    and the Privacy Policy.

 6. Complete the wizard.
   The installation package will be created and added to the list of installation packages. Using the installation
   package, you can install the application on devices in the corporate network or update the application version.

 7. If necessary, edit initial configuration settings (see the table below). To do this, open the properties of the
    installation package and go to Settings tab.


     Kaspersky Security Center Web Console versions earlier than 14.2 do not support providing initial
     configuration settings in the properties of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security installation package. Use the
     autoinstall.ini configuration file to configure settings.




                                                          49
Installation package settings

                         Section                                                             Description

   Specify the locale.                           Select this check box to specify the locale used during the application operation. In the
                                                 displayed field, enter the locale in the RFC 3066 format.
                                                 If this setting is not specified, the default locale is used.

   Activate the application                      Select this check box if you want to activate the application during installation. In the
                                                 displayed field, enter the activation code.
                                                 You can also activate the application after installation.


                                                    This setting applies only if the application is used in Standard mode.




   Select the update source.                     Select the update source for databases and application modules:
                                                     Update servers for databases and application modules.
                                                     Kaspersky Security Center.
                                                     Other source in the local or global network. If you select this option, enter the
                                                     address of the update source in the field that opens.


                                                    This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




   Run database update task after installation   Select this check box if you want to run the databases and application modules update task
                                                 after installing the application.


                                                    This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




   Specify the proxy server settings             Select this check box if you use a proxy server for internet access. In the displayed field,
                                                 enter the proxy server address in one of the following formats:
                                                     < connection protocol >://< IP address of the proxy server >:< port
                                                     number > if the proxy server connection does not require authentication
                                                     < connection protocol >://< user name >:< password >@< IP address of
                                                     the proxy server >:< port number > if the proxy server connection requires
                                                     authentication


                                                    Connecting to a proxy server over HTTPS is not supported.




                                                    This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




   Install kernel source                         Select this check box to automatically start of kernel module compilation.

   Use the graphical user interface              Select this check box if you plan to install the graphical user interface of the application (the
                                                 files for installing the graphical interface are included in the installation package).


                                                    This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




   Specify a user with the admin role            Select the check box to specify the user to be assigned the administrator (admin) role. In
                                                 the displayed field, enter the user name.

   Configure SELinux automatically               Select the check box to automatically configure SELinux to work with Kaspersky Endpoint
                                                 Security.

   Remove users from privileged groups           Select this check box to remove users from the 'kesladmin' and 'keslaudit' privileged groups
                                                 before installing the application.
                                                 If the check box is selected and the 'nogroup' group does not exist, the installation fails and
                                                 you are prompted to manually remove users from privileged groups.


                                                                50
                        Section                                                                Description

     Disable protection components and scan          Select this check box to start the application with protection components and scan tasks
     tasks for the first application startup after   disabled after installation.
     installation
                                                     An installation with protection components disabled can be convenient, for example, in
                                                     order to reproduce a problem in the operation of the application and create a trace file.
                                                     If you enable the necessary components and tasks, the enabled components and tasks will
                                                     continue to work after the application is restarted.

     Use the application in Light Agent mode         Select the check box if you want to use the application in Light Agent mode to protect
                                                     virtual environments (as part of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent).
                                                     If this check box is cleared, the application is used in Standard mode.

     Enable VDI protection mode                      Select this check box to enable VDI protection mode. This is recommended if you are
                                                     installing the application on a virtual machine template that will be used to create temporary
                                                     virtual machines.


                                                        The setting is applied only if the application is used in Light Agent mode.




     The protected virtual machine is used as a      Select this check box if the virtual machine on which you are installing the application is
     server                                          used in the virtual infrastructure as a server.


                                                        The setting is applied only if the application is used in Light Agent mode.




Creating an installation package in the Administration Console
Before creating an installation package for Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you need to prepare the files to be
included in the package.

To prepare files for creating an installation package:

 1. Download the kesl.zip archive from the application download page . It is located in the Kaspersky Endpoint
    Security for Linux (Additional distribution → Files for Product remote installation).

 2. Unpack the kesl.zip archive to a folder accessible to Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server. Place
    the distribution files, that correspond to the type of operating system where you want to install the application
    and the type of its package manager, to the same folder:

      To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

          kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.i386.rpm (for 32-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_i386.deb (for 32-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.x86_64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_amd64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-12.2.0-<build number>.aarch64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with rpm)

          kesl_12.2.0-<build number>_arm64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with dpkg)




                                                                   51
      To install the graphical user interface of the application:

          kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.i386.rpm (for 32-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_i386.deb (for 32-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.x86_64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems with rpm)

          kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_amd64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems with dpkg)

          kesl-gui-12.2.0-<build number>.aarch64.rpm (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with
          rpm)

          kesl-gui_12.2.0-<build number>_arm64.deb (for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture with
          dpkg)


         If you do not want to install the graphical user interface, do not add these files to the folder; this will
         make the installation package smaller.



         If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the
         graphical user interface is not supported.



     If you do not plan to install the graphical interface, you need to opt out by setting USE_GUI=No in the
     autoinstall.ini configuration file. Otherwise, the installation will fail.


   If you want to use the created installation package with different operating systems or package managers,
   place the files for all the types of operating systems and package managers that you need in the directory.

 3. If you plan to use the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application in standard mode and want to use pre-
    downloaded application databases:

    a. Place prepared archives with databases for all your operating system types into the folder.

    b. In initial configuration settings, disable the database update task after installing the application. To do this,
       open the autoinstall.ini configuration file and set UPDATE_EXECUTE=no. The autoinstall.ini file is located in
       the folder where you unpacked the kesl.zip archive.

 4. If you want to prepare the initial configuration settings of the application, open the autoinstall.ini configuration
    file and edit it as necessary.


     If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, you
     need to set KSVLA_MODE=yes in the autoinstall.ini configuration file.


To create an installation package for Kaspersky Endpoint Security in the Administration Console of Kaspersky
Security Center:

 1. In the console tree, select Additional → Remote installation → Installation packages.

 2. Click the Create installation package button.
   The wizard for creating an installation package will start.
                                                           52
 3. In the wizard window that opens, click the Create installation package for a Kaspersky application button.

 4. Enter the name of the new installation package and proceed to the next step.

 5. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security distribution package. To do this, open a standard browsing window using
    the Browse button and specify the path to the kesl.kud file. The file is located in the folder where you unpacked
    the kesl.zip archive.
   The application name is displayed in the window.
   Proceed to the next step.

 6. Read the End User License Agreement concluded between you and Kaspersky, and the Privacy Policy
    describing the handling and transmission of data.
   To continue creating the installation package, you must confirm that you have read and accept the full terms of
   the End User License Agreement and the Privacy Policy. To confirm, in the window that opens, select both
   check boxes.
   Proceed to the next step.

 7. The wizard downloads the files required to install the application to Kaspersky Security Center Administration
    Server. Wait for the download to finish.

 8. Complete the wizard.

The created installation package is located in the tree of the Administration Console of Kaspersky Security Center
in the Additional → Remote installation → Installation packages folder. You can use the same installation
package many times.



Preparing an archive with application databases in order to
create an installation package with integrated databases
You can create an installation package for remote installation and include pre-downloaded application databases in
it. This may be useful, for example, if you are installing the application on a device with the Astra Linux Special
Edition operating system. If you are using an installation package with integrated databases, the application is
installed together with the databases; in this case, you do not need to update the databases immediately after
installation.

To create an archive with databases for installing the application:

 1. Install and perform the initial configuration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security on the device using the command
    line or using Kaspersky Security Center.

 2. Update the application databases. You can update the databases during the initial configuration of the
    application or after installation by running a task of an Update type in the command line or an Update task in the
    Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console or the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

 3. Copy the contents of the /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/updates/ directory to one of the following
    subdirectories, depending on the architecture of the operating system for which you are creating the
    installation package with integrated databases: /i386/, /x86_64/, or /arm64/.

 4. Place the directories with the databases into a kesl-bases.tgz archive, preserving the structure of nested
    directories. You can place only one subdirectory with databases for the required architecture of the operating
    system in the archive, or if you plan to create an installation package for installation on several operating
    systems with different architectures, you can place all the subdirectories with databases (/i386/, /x86_64/, or
    /arm64/) into a single archive for different architectures.
                                                         53
You can use the created archive with application databases when creating an installation package in the Kaspersky
Security Center Administration Console or Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.



Autoinstall.ini configuration file settings
In the autoinstall.ini configuration file, you can specify the settings shown in the table below. The set of applicable
settings depends on the application usage mode.

Autoinstall.ini configuration file settings

              Setting                                      Description                                               Values

   KSVLA_MODE                          Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage mode.          yes - Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode
                                                                                        to protect virtual environments (as part of Kaspersky Hybrid
                                                                                        Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent).
                                                                                        no (default value) – Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in
                                                                                        Standard mode.

   SERVER_MODE                         The role of the protected virtual machine        yes (default value) – the protected virtual machine is used as a
                                       (server or workstation).                         server.
                                                                                        no - the protected virtual machine is used as a workstation.

                                          The setting is applied only if the
                                          application is used in Light Agent mode.




   VDI_MODE                            Enabling VDI protection mode to optimize         yes – enable VDI protection mode. This is recommended if you
                                       application performance on temporary virtual     are installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security on a virtual machine
                                       machines.                                        template that will be used to create temporary virtual machines.
                                                                                        no (default value) – do not enable VDI protection mode.

                                          The setting is applied only if the
                                          application is used in Light Agent mode.




   EULA_AGREED                         Required setting.                                yes (default) – accept the terms and conditions of the End
                                       Acceptance of the terms of the End User          User License Agreement.
                                       License Agreement.                               no – do not accept the terms and conditions of the End User
                                                                                        License Agreement. The application installation will be
                                                                                        terminated.

   PRIVACY_POLICY_AGREED               Required setting.                                yes (default) – accept the terms and conditions of the Privacy
                                       Acceptance of the terms of the Privacy Policy.   Policy.
                                                                                        no – do not accept the terms and conditions of the Privacy
                                                                                        Policy. The application installation will be terminated.

   USE_KSN                             Required setting.                                yes – accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky
                                       Enabling Kaspersky Security Network usage: To    Security Network Statement and enable the use of KSN.
                                       enable the use of KSN, the terms of the          no – (default value) do not accept the terms and conditions of
                                       Kaspersky Security Network Statement must be     the Kaspersky Security Network Statement. Opting out of the
                                       accepted.                                        KSN does not abort the application installation process.


                                                                                           If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Standard mode
                                                                                           and you have enabled the use of KSN, the application's
                                                                                           cloud mode is automatically enabled. In this mode,
                                                                                           Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses a lightweight version of
                                                                                           the malware databases.




   GROUP_CLEAN                         Required setting.                                yes - Remove users from the privileged groups. If the value is
                                       Removing users from the kesladmin and            yes and there is no nogroup group, the installation will fail and
                                       keslaudit privileged groups.                     you will be prompted to manually remove users from privileged
                                                                                        groups.
                                                                                        no - Do not remove users from the privileged groups.



                                                                            54
          Setting                         Description                                                      Values

LOCALE                Optional setting.                                     The locale in the format specified by RFC 3066.
                      The locale used for the application events sent       If the Locale setting is not specified, the operating system
                      to Kaspersky Security Center.                         locale is used. If the application fails to determine the operating
                                                                            system localization language or the operating system
                                                                            localization is not supported, the default value will be used –
                                                                             en_US.utf8 .
                                                                            The locale of the graphical interface and the application
                                                                            command line depends on the value of the LANG environment
                                                                            variable. If the locale that is not supported by Kaspersky
                                                                            Endpoint Security is specified as the value of the LANG
                                                                            environment variable, the graphical interface and the command
                                                                            line are displayed in English.

INSTALL_LICENSE       Activation code for adding a license key to the       < activation code > if you want to activate the application
                      application.                                          during installation.
                                                                             None if you do not want to activate the application during
                                                                            installation, for example, if you are installing the application in an
                         This setting applies only if the application       isolated network segment without internet access.
                         is used in standard mode.



UPDATER_SOURCE        Update source for databases and application           SCServer – use the Kaspersky Security Center Administration
                      modules.                                              Server as the update source.
                                                                            KLServers – use Kaspersky servers as the update source. This
                                                                            value is used by default.
                         This setting applies only if the application
                         is used in standard mode.                          < update source address > .




PROXY_SERVER          Address of the proxy server used to connect to        Address of the proxy server in one of the following formats:
                      the Internet.                                             < connection protocol >://< IP address of the
                                                                                proxy server >:< port number > if the proxy server
                                                                                connection does not require authentication.
                         This setting applies only if the application           < connection protocol >://< user name >:
                         is used in standard mode.
                                                                                < password >@< IP address of the proxy server >:
                                                                                < port number > if the proxy server connection requires
                                                                                authentication


                                                                               Connecting to a proxy server over HTTPS is not
                                                                               supported.




UPDATE_EXECUTE        Start application database update task during         yes (default value) – start the update task.
                      setup.
                                                                            no – do not start update task.


                         This setting applies only if the application
                         is used in standard mode.




KERNEL_SRCS_INSTALL   Automatically start the compilation of the kernel     yes (default) – compile the kernel module when the File Threat
                      module when the File Threat Protection task is        Protection task starts.
                      started on operating systems that do not
                                                                            no – do not compile the kernel module.
                      support the fanotify technology.

USE_GUI               Installing and using the graphical interface of the    yes – install and use the application's graphical interface (the
                      application.                                          files for installing the graphical interface are included in the
                                                                            installation package).
                                                                            no (default) – do not use the graphical interface.
                         This setting applies only if the application
                         is used in standard mode.




ADMIN_USER            A user assigned the administrator role (admin).




                                                             55
          Setting                            Description                                                  Values

  CONFIGURE_SELINUX         Automatic configuration of SELinux for working    yes (default value) – automatically configure SELinux to work
                            with Kaspersky Endpoint Security.                 with Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
                                                                              no – do not automatically configure SELinux to work with
                                                                              Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

  DISABLE_PROTECTION        Disabling the functional components of the        yes - Disable protection components and scan tasks when the
                            application after installation.                   application is started after installation.
                            An installation with components disabled can be   no - Do not disable protection components and scan tasks
                            convenient, for example, if you need to           when the application is started after installation.
                            reproduce a problem with the application and
                            create a trace file.
                            If you enable the necessary components after
                            installing the application with
                             DISABLE_PROTECTION=yes , the enabled
                            components will continue to work after the
                            application is restarted.




  If you want to change the settings in the autoinstall.ini configuration file, specify the values of settings in the
  following format: <setting_name>=<setting_value> (the application does not process spaces between the
  name of a setting and its value).




Getting started using Kaspersky Security Center
After deploying Kaspersky Endpoint Security through Kaspersky Security Center, you must prepare the
application for operation. The actions to be performed depend on the mode in which you plan to use Kaspersky
Endpoint Security.


Standard mode

If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode, after deploying the application, you need to do
the following:

 1. Activate the application if activation was not performed using the key added to the installation package of the
    application.
   You can create and execute an activation task using the Administration Console or Kaspersky Security Center
   Web Console, as well as distribute the license key from the Kaspersky Security Center key storage to the
   devices.

 2. Update the databases and application modules if you did not add pre-downloaded application databases to
    the installation package of the application. You can use the Update task, which is created automatically by the
    initial configuration wizard of Kaspersky Security Center after installing the MMC management plug-in or the
    Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in.


     Kaspersky Endpoint Security protects the device only after the application databases are updated.


 3. Configure a policy for centralized management of the application using Kaspersky Security Center
    Administration Console or Web Console. You can use a policy that is created automatically by the initial
    configuration wizard of Kaspersky Security Center after installing the administration MMC plug-in or the
    Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration web plug-in.
   You can also configure the application management tasks using the Administration Console or the Web
   Console.

                                                                56
Light Agent mode

If you plan to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, after
deploying the application, perform the following actions:

 1. Configure SVM detection settings for Light Agents. To do this, you need to create and configure a policy for
    centralized application management on client devices. You can use the Administration Console or the Web
    Console to work with policies.
   You need to configure the following settings in the policy properties:

      Settings for connecting Light Agents to the Integration Server.

      Settings for connecting Light Agents to SVMs.

 2. Make sure that a connection is established between Light Agents and the SVMs and the Integration Server.
   You can get information about the connection by using Kaspersky Endpoint Security commands on the
   protected virtual machine:

      You can view information about connecting to SVMs using the kesl-control [-V] --svm-info
      command.

      You can view information about connecting to the Integration Server using the kesl-control [-V] --
      viis-info command.

 3. Make sure that Kaspersky Endpoint Security used as a Light Agent receives information about the license
    under which Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent is activated.
   After activating the solution on SVMs and connecting Light Agents to the SVMs, the Protection Server
   component sends license information to Light Agents. You can remotely view information about the license
   used by the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application as part of the solution using Kaspersky Security Center or
   on the command line of a protected virtual machine.

 4. Make sure that database updates required for Light Agent to operate are installed on the protected virtual
    machines.
   Databases on protected virtual machines are updated using a special Update task, in which a folder on the SVM
   is specified as the update source. The update task starts automatically.
   You can check how up-to-date the databases are on a protected virtual machine with Light Agent by using the
   kesl-control --app-info command.

You can also configure the application using the policy and application management tasks in the Administration
Console or the Web Console.




Installing and initially configuring the application using the
command line
You can install the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on a client device using the command line.




                                                        57
Installation using the command line involves the following steps:

 1. Installing the application and the graphical interface of the application. Depending on the mode in which you
    want to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you can choose the following installation options:

      If you want to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Basic mode, you can:

          Install the application with the graphical interface.

          Install the application without the graphical interface.

          Install the graphical interface on the device where the application is installed.


            It is not possible to install the graphical interface on a device on which the application is not installed.


      If you want to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode, you must install the application without
      the graphical interface. Graphical interface is not supported.


     If the version of the apt package manager is lower than 1.1.X, use the dpkg/rpm package manager
     (depending on the operating system) for installation.


 2. Initial configuration of the application
   The application needs initial configuration to prepare it for operation and enable the protection of the client
   device.


     If initial configuration of the application has not been completed on a device, you cannot use or update the
     application on that device.


   Initial configuration of the application is performed by running the special initial configuration script from the
   distribution kit of Kaspersky Endpoint Security. You can perform the initial configuration of the application in
   interactive mode or in automatic mode.



Installing the application using the command line

Installing the application without the graphical interface.

To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security from an RPM package on a 32-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # rpm -i kesl-12.2.0-< build number >.i386.rpm


To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security from an RPM package on a 64-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # rpm -i kesl-12.2.0-< build number >.x86_64.rpm




                                                          58
To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security from an RPM package on a 64-bit operating system for the Arm
architecture, execute the following command:

  # rpm -i kesl-12.2.0-< build number >.aarch64.rpm


To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security from a DEB package on a 32-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # apt-get install ./kesl_12.2.0-< build number >_i386.deb


To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security from a DEB package on a 64-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # apt-get install ./kesl_12.2.0-< build number >_amd64.deb


To install Kaspersky Endpoint Security from a DEB package on a 64-bit operating system for the Arm architecture,
execute the following command:

  # apt-get install ./kesl_12.2.0-< build number >_arm64.deb


Installing the graphical interface of the application

To install the graphical interface from the RPM package to a 32-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # rpm -i kesl-gui-12.2.0-< build number >.i386.rpm


To install the graphical interface from the RPM package to a 64-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # rpm -i kesl-gui-12.2.0-< build number >.x86_64.rpm


To install the graphical interface from an RPM package on a 64-bit operating system for the Arm architecture,
execute the following command:

  # rpm -i kesl-gui-12.2.0-< build number >.aarch64.rpm


To install the graphical interface from the DEB package to a 32-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # apt-get install ./kesl-gui_12.2.0-< build number >_i386.deb


To install the graphical interface from the DEB package to a 64-bit operating system, execute the following
command:

  # apt-get install ./kesl-gui_12.2.0-< build number >_amd64.deb


To install the graphical interface from a DEB package on a 64-bit operating system for the Arm architecture,
execute the following command:

  # apt-get install ./kesl-gui_12.2.0-< build number >_arm64.deb
                                                       59
Post-installation configuration of the application in interactive
mode
To perform initial configuration of the application in interactive mode, you need to run the initial configuration
script of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.


  You must run the initial configuration script as root.


To run the initial configuration script, execute the following command:

  # /opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/kesl-setup.pl


The script requests the values of Kaspersky Endpoint Security settings step-by-step. The script finishing and the
console being released indicate that the post-installation configuration is completed.

To check the return code, execute the following command:

  echo $?


If the command returns 0, the post-installation configuration of the application is completed successfully.


  Kaspersky Endpoint Security protects the device only after the application databases are updated.




Selecting the application usage mode
At this step, select the Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage mode:

   Enter yes if you want to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments.

   Enter no if you want to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode.


  After the initial configuration is complete, you cannot change the application usage mode.




Defining the role of the virtual machine

  This step is displayed only if at the first step you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent
  mode for protecting virtual environments.




                                                           60
At this step, specify the role of the virtual machine (server or workstation) on which you are installing Kaspersky
Endpoint Security:

   Enter yes if you are using the virtual machine as a server.

   Enter no if you are using a virtual machine as a workstation.

The role of a virtual machine determines the license under which the application will be used on this virtual machine
as well as the available functionality.



Enabling VDI protection mode

  This step is displayed only if at the first step you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent
  mode for protecting virtual environments.


At this step, you can enable VDI protection mode. This mode optimizes the operation of Kaspersky Endpoint
Security on temporary virtual machines. If VDI protection mode is enabled, updates that require restarting the
virtual machine are not installed. When receiving updates that require a restart, the Light Agent installed on the
virtual machine sends a message to Kaspersky Security Center about the need to update the protected virtual
machine template.

Specify yes if you want to enable VDI protection mode. This is recommended if you are installing Kaspersky
Endpoint Security on a virtual machine template that will be used to create temporary virtual machines.

Specify no if you do not want to enable VDI protection mode. This is recommended if you are installing Kaspersky
Endpoint Security on a persistent virtual machine or on a virtual machine template that will be used to create
persistent virtual machines.



Selecting the locale
At this step, the application displays the list of supported locales in RFC 3066 format.

Specify the locale as it is listed here. This locale is used for the following purposes:

   Localization of the texts of the End User License Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Kaspersky Security Network
   Statement, which are displayed during the installation.

   Localization of application events sent to Kaspersky Security Center.


  The locale of the graphical interface and the application command line is taken from the LANG environment
  variable. If the application does not support this localization, it defaults to the English localization.




Viewing the End User License Agreement and the Privacy Policy
At this step, read the End User License Agreement concluded between you and Kaspersky, and the Privacy Policy
describing the handling and transmission of data.


                                                           61
Accepting the End User License Agreement
At this step, you must either accept or decline the terms of the End User License Agreement.

After exiting viewing mode, enter one of the following values:

   yes (or y), if you accept the terms of the End User License Agreement.

   no (or n), if you do not accept the terms of the End User License Agreement.


  If you did not accept the terms and conditions of the End User License Agreement, the Kaspersky Endpoint
  Security setup process is aborted.




Accepting the Privacy Policy
At this step, you must either accept or decline the terms of the Privacy Policy.

After exiting viewing mode, enter one of the following values:

   yes (or y), if you accept the terms of the Privacy Policy.

   no (or n), if you do not accept the terms of the Privacy Policy.


  If you did not accept the terms and conditions of the Privacy Policy, the Kaspersky Endpoint Security setup
  process is aborted.




Using Kaspersky Security Network
At this step, you must either accept or decline the terms of use of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement.
The file ksn_license.<language ID> containing the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement is located in
the directory /opt/kaspersky/kesl/doc/.

Enter one of the following values:

   yes (or y), if you accept the terms of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement. This enables the extended
   KSN mode.

   no (or n), if you do not accept the terms of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement.




                                                        62
Refusal to participate in Kaspersky Security Network does not interrupt the initial configuration of Kaspersky
Endpoint Security. You can enable, disable, or change the Kaspersky Security Network mode at any time.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Standard mode and you have enabled the use of Kaspersky Security
  Network, the application's cloud mode is automatically enabled. In this mode, Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  uses a lightweight version of the anti-malware databases. Use of the lightweight anti-malware databases is
  not supported in Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments.




Removing users from privileged groups

  This step is displayed only if users are detected in the kesladmin group and/or in the keslaudit group.


At this step, specify whether or not to remove users from the kesladmin and keslaudit privileged groups. Users
included in the kesladmin and keslaudit groups receive privileged access to the application's functions.

Enter yes to remove all detected users from the kesladmin and/or keslaudit group. Users whose primary group is
kesladmin or keslaudit will be moved to the nogroup group. If there is no nogroup group, the installation will fail and
you will be prompted to manually remove users from privileged groups.

Enter no if you do not want the application to remove users from the privileged groups.



Assigning the Administrator role to a user
At this step, you can grant the administrator (admin) role to the user.

Enter the name of the user to whom you want to grant the administrator role. You need the Administrator role to
manage application settings and task settings in the graphical interface of the application and on the command
line without using the sudo command.

You can assign the administrator role to a user later, after completing the initial configuration.



Determining the file operation interceptor type
At this step, the file operation interceptor type for the utilized operating system is determined. For operating
systems that do not support fanotify technology, kernel module compilation will begin.

If all the required packages are available, the kernel module will be automatically compiled when the File Threat
Protection task starts.

If, during the compilation of the kernel module, any dependencies are not found on the device, the Kaspersky
Endpoint Security application suggests installing the relevant packages. If the package download fails, an error
message will be displayed.




                                                          63
Enabling automatic configuration of SELinux

  This step is displayed only if SELinux is installed on your operating system.


At this step, you can enable automatic configuration of the SELinux access control system for working with
Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

Enter yes to enable automatic configuration of SELinux. If SELinux cannot be configured automatically (for
example, if the semanage utility is missing), the application displays an error message and prompts the user to
configure SELinux manually.

Enter no if you do not want the application to automatically configure SELinux.

By default, the application suggests yes.

If necessary, you can manually configure SELinux to work with the application later, after the initial configuration of
the application is complete.



Configuring the update source

  This step is displayed only if you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode as a first step.
  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode, Kaspersky Endpoint Security receives updates of
  databases and application modules for the Light Agent from the Protection Server.


At this step, you must specify the update source for databases and application modules. The application
databases contain descriptions of the threat signatures and methods of countering them. The application uses
these records when searching and neutralizing threats. Kaspersky virus analysts regularly add new records about
threats.

Enter one of the following values:

   KLServers: the application receives updates from one of the Kaspersky update servers.

   SCServer: the application downloads updates to the protected device from Kaspersky Security Center
   Administration Server installed in your organization. You can select this update source if you use Kaspersky
   Security Center for centralized administration of device protection in your organization.

   Custom: the application downloads updates from a custom source. You can specify the address of the custom
   source of updates in the local area network or on the Internet.




Configuring proxy server settings

  This step is displayed only if you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode as a first step.



                                                         64
At this step, you must specify the proxy server settings if you are using a proxy server to access the Internet.
Internet connection is required to download the application databases from the update servers.

To configure proxy server settings, perform one of the following actions:

   If you use a proxy server to connect to the Internet, specify the address of the proxy server using one
   of the following formats:

      < connection protocol >://< IP address of the proxy server >:< port number > if the proxy
      server connection does not require authentication

      < connection protocol >://< user name >:< password >@< IP address of the proxy server >:
      < port number > if the proxy server connection requires authentication


         Connecting to a proxy server over HTTPS is not supported.



         When connecting via an HTTP proxy, we recommend to use a separate account that is not used to sign
         in to other systems. An HTTP proxy uses an insecure connection, and the account may be
         compromised.


   If you do not use a proxy server to connect to the Internet, enter no as your answer.

By default, the application suggests no.

You can manage proxy server settings later, after completing the initial configuration.



Starting an application database update

  This step is displayed only if you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode as a first step.
  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode, Kaspersky Endpoint Security receives updates of
  databases and application modules for the Light Agent from the Protection Server.


At this step, you can run the application database update task on the client device.

If you do not want to start to download the application databases, enter no.

If you want to start the database update task on the device, enter yes.

By default, the application suggests yes.

If yes is selected, the application will be automatically restarted after the databases are updated.


  Kaspersky Endpoint Security protects the device only after the application databases are updated.


You can run the update task later, after completing the initial configuration.




                                                         65
Enabling automatic application database update

  This step is displayed only if you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode as a first step.
  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode, Kaspersky Endpoint Security receives updates of
  databases and application modules for the Light Agent from the Protection Server.


At this step, you can enable automatic update of the application databases.

Enter yes to enable automatic application database update. By default, the application checks for available
database updates every 60 minutes. If updates are available, the application downloads the updated databases.

Enter no if you do not want the application to automatically update the databases.

You can enable automatic database update later, after completing the initial configuration, by configuring the
update task schedule.



Application activation

  This step is displayed only if you selected to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Standard mode as a first step.
  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode, Kaspersky Endpoint Security receives information
  about the license from the Protection Server; there is no need to activate Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  separately.


At this step, you can activate the application using an activation code or a key file.

To activate the application using an activation code, enter the activation code.

To activate the application using a key file, specify the full path to the key file.


  If no activation code or key file is specified, the application is activated using a trial key for one month.


You can activate the application later, after completing the initial configuration.




                                                            66
Post-installation configuration of the application in automatic
mode
To perform the initial configuration of the application in automatic mode:

 1. Prepare a configuration file that contains the initial configuration settings. You can create this file or copy the
    necessary structure from the autoinstall.ini configuration file used for remote installation of the application
    using Kaspersky Security Center.

 2. Pass the path to the configuration file to the initial configuration script of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
    application.


     You must run the initial configuration script as root.


To launch the automatic initial configuration of the application, the following command:

  # /opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/kesl-setup.pl --autoinstall=< initial configuration file >


where < initial configuration file > is the path to the configuration file that contains the initial
configuration settings.

When the post-installation configuration script is finished and releases the console, the post-installation
configuration of the application is complete.

To check the return code, execute the following command:

  echo $?


If the command returns 0, the post-installation configuration of the application is completed successfully.


  Kaspersky Endpoint Security protects the device only after the application databases are updated.


To correctly update application modules after the script has finished, you may need to restart the application.
Check the status of updates for the application using the kesl-control --app-info command.



Settings in the configuration file for post-installation
configuration
In the post-installation configuration file, you can specify the settings shown in the table below. The set of
applicable settings depends on the application usage mode.




                                                          67
Settings in the configuration file for post-installation configuration

              Setting                                     Description                                                 Values

   KSVLA_MODE                        Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage mode.             yes - Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent
                                                                                         mode to protect virtual environments (as part of Kaspersky
                                                                                         Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent).
                                                                                         no - Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Standard mode.

   SERVER_MODE                       The role of the protected virtual machine (server   yes - the protected virtual machine is used as a server.
                                     or workstation).
                                                                                         no - the protected virtual machine is used as a workstation.


                                        The setting is applied only if the application
                                        is used in Light Agent mode.




   VDI_MODE                          Enabling VDI protection mode to optimize            yes – enable VDI protection mode. This is recommended if
                                     application performance on temporary virtual        you are installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security on a virtual
                                     machines.                                           machine template that will be used to create temporary
                                                                                         virtual machines.
                                                                                         no – do not enable VDI protection mode.
                                        The setting is applied only if the application
                                        is used in Light Agent mode.




   EULA_AGREED                       Required setting.                                   yes – accept the terms and conditions of the End User
                                     Acceptance of the terms of the End User License     License Agreement.
                                     Agreement.                                          no – do not accept the terms and conditions of the End User
                                                                                         License Agreement. The initial configuration of the
                                                                                         application is aborted.

   PRIVACY_POLICY_AGREED             Required setting.                                   yes – accept the terms and conditions of the Privacy Policy.
                                     Acceptance of the terms and conditions of the       no – do not accept the terms and conditions of the Privacy
                                     Privacy Policy.                                     Policy. The initial configuration of the application is aborted.

   USE_KSN                           Required setting.                                   yes – accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky
                                     Enabling Kaspersky Security Network usage: To       Security Network Statement and enable the use of KSN.
                                     enable the use of KSN, the terms of the Kaspersky   no – do not accept the Kaspersky Security Network
                                     Security Network Statement must be accepted.        Statement. Opting out of the KSN does not abort the initial
                                                                                         configuration process.


                                                                                            If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Standard
                                                                                            mode and you have enabled the use of KSN, the
                                                                                            application's cloud mode is automatically enabled. In
                                                                                            this mode, Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses a
                                                                                            lightweight version of the malware databases.




   GROUP_CLEAN                       Required setting.                                   yes - Remove users from the privileged groups. If the value is
                                     Removing users from the kesladmin and keslaudit     yes and there is no nogroup group, the installation will fail
                                     privileged groups.                                  and you will be prompted to manually remove users from
                                                                                         privileged groups.
                                                                                         no - Do not remove users from the privileged groups.

   LOCALE                            Optional setting.                                   The locale in the format specified by RFC 3066.
                                     The locale used for the texts of the End User       If the Locale setting is not specified, the operating system
                                     License Agreement, the Privacy Policy and the       locale is used. If the application fails to determine the
                                     Kaspersky Security Network Statement, as well as    operating system localization language or the operating
                                     application events sent to Kaspersky Security       system localization is not supported, the default value will be
                                     Center.                                             used – en_US.utf8 .
                                                                                         The locale of the graphical interface and the application
                                                                                         command line depends on the value of the LANG
                                                                                         environment variable. If the locale that is not supported by
                                                                                         Kaspersky Endpoint Security is specified as the value of the
                                                                                         LANG environment variable, the graphical interface and the
                                                                                         command line are displayed in English.




                                                                            68
        Setting                              Description                                                   Values

INSTALL_LICENSE         Activation code or full path to the key file for     < activation code > if you want to activate the application
                        adding a license key to the application.             using an activation code during installation.
                                                                             < full path to key file > if you want to activate the
                                                                             application using a key file during installation.
                           This setting applies only if the application is
                           used in standard mode.                             None if you do not want to activate the application during
                                                                             installation, for example, if you are installing the application in
                                                                             an isolated network segment without internet access.

UPDATER_SOURCE          Update source for databases and application          SCServer – use the Kaspersky Security Center
                        modules.                                             Administration Server as the update source.
                                                                             KLServers – use Kaspersky servers as the update source.

                           This setting applies only if the application is   < update source address > .
                           used in standard mode.




PROXY_SERVER            Address of the proxy server used to connect to       Address of the proxy server in one of the following formats:
                        the Internet.
                                                                                 < connection protocol >://< IP address of the
                                                                                 proxy server >:< port number > if the proxy server
                                                                                 connection does not require authentication.
                           This setting applies only if the application is       < connection protocol >://< user name >:
                           used in standard mode.
                                                                                 < password >@< IP address of the proxy
                                                                                 server >:< port number > if the proxy server
                                                                                 connection requires authentication


                                                                                Connecting to a proxy server over HTTPS is not
                                                                                supported.




UPDATE_EXECUTE          Start the application database update task during    yes – start update task.
                        the initial configuration.
                                                                             no – do not start update task.


                           This setting applies only if the application is
                           used in standard mode.




KERNEL_SRCS_INSTALL     Automatically start the compilation of the kernel    yes – compile the kernel module when the File Threat
                        module when the File Threat Protection task is       Protection task starts.
                        started on operating systems that do not support
                                                                             no – do not compile the kernel module.
                        the fanotify technology.

ADMIN_USER              A user assigned the administrator role (admin).

CONFIGURE_SELINUX       Automatic configuration of SELinux for working       yes – automatically configure SELinux to work with
                        with Kaspersky Endpoint Security.                    Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
                                                                             no – do not automatically configure SELinux to work with
                                                                             Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

DISABLE_PROTECTION      Disable protection components and scan tasks         yes - Disable protection components and scan tasks when
                        after the application is installed.                  the application is started after installation.
                        An installation with protection components           no - Do not disable protection components and scan tasks
                        disabled can be convenient, for example, in order    when the application is started after installation.
                        to reproduce a problem in the operation of the
                        application and create a trace file.
                        If you enable the necessary components and tasks
                        after installing the application with the
                         DISABLE_PROTECTION=yes parameter, the
                        enabled components and tasks will continue to
                        work after the application is restarted.




If you want to change the settings in the configuration file for initial setup of the application, specify the
values of settings in the following format: <setting_name>=<setting_value> (the application does not process
spaces between the name of a setting and its value).


                                                                69
Configuring allowing rules in the SELinux system

Manually configuring SELinux for working with the application

If SELinux couldn't s be configured automatically during the initial configuration of the application, or if you
declined automatic configuration, you can manually configure SELinux to work with Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

To manually configure SELinux to work with the application:

 1. Switch SELinux to permissive mode:

      If SELinux has been activated, run the following command:
       # setenforce Permissive

      If SELinux was disabled, set the SELINUX=permissive setting in the configuration file / etc / selinux /
      config and restart the operating system.

 2. Make sure the semanage utility is installed on the system. If the utility is not installed, install the policycoreutils-
    python or policycoreutils-python-utils package, depending on the package manager.

 3. If you are using a custom SELinux policy instead of the default targeted policy, assign a label to each source
    executable file of Kaspersky Endpoint Security in accordance with the SELinux policy being used; to do so, run
    the following commands:
   # semanage fcontext -a -t bin_t <executable file>
   # restorecon -v <executable file>
   where <executable file> is:

      /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/12.2.0.<build number>_<installation timestamp>/opt/kaspersky/kesl/libexec/kesl

      /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/12.2.0.<build number>_<installation timestamp>/opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/kesl-
      control

      /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/12.2.0.<build number>_<installation timestamp>/opt/kaspersky/kesl/libexec/kesl-gui

      /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/12.2.0.<build number>_<installation timestamp>/opt/kaspersky/kesl/shared/kesl

 4. Run the following tasks:

      File Threat Protection task:
       kesl-control --start-task 1

      Critical Areas Scan task:
       kesl-control --start-task 4 -W


     It is recommended to run all the tasks that you plan to run while using Kaspersky Endpoint Security.


 5. Start the graphical user interface if you plan to use it.

                                                            70
 6. Ensure that there are no errors in the audit.log file:
   # grep kesl /var/log/audit/audit.log

 7. If there are errors in the audit.log file, create and download a new rule module based on the blocking records in
    order to fix the errors, and then relaunch all the tasks that you plan to run while using Kaspersky Endpoint
    Security; to do so, run the following commands:
   # grep kesl /var/log/audit/audit.log | audit2allow -M kesl
   # semodule -i kesl.pp


     If new audit messages related to Kaspersky Endpoint Security appear, the file with the rule module file
     must be updated.


 8. Switch SELinux to blocking mode:
   # setenforce Enforcing


  If you use a custom SELinux policy, manually assign a label to Kaspersky Endpoint Security source executable
  files after installing application updates (follow steps 1, 3–8).


You can find more information in the documentation for your operating system.


Configuring SELinux to run the "Start process" task

If SELinux is installed in your operating system in Enforcing mode, starting the Start process task requires
additional configuration of SELinux.

To configure SELinux to run the "Start process" task:

 1. Switch SELinux to permissive mode:

       If SELinux has been activated, run the following command:
       # setenforce Permissive

       If SELinux was disabled, set the SELINUX=permissive setting in the configuration file / etc / selinux /
       config and restart the operating system.

 2. Make sure the semanage utility is installed on the system. If the utility is not installed, install the policycoreutils-
    python or policycoreutils-python-utils package, depending on the package manager.

 3. Start the "Start process" task.

 4. Ensure that there are no errors in the audit.log file:
   # grep kesl /var/log/audit/audit.log

 5. If errors are present in the audit.log file, create and load a new rules module based on blocking rules to fix the
    errors, then run the "Start process" task again.
   # grep kesl /var/log/audit/audit.log | audit2allow -M kesl
   # semodule -i kesl.pp



                                                             71
 6. Switch SELinux to blocking mode:
   # setenforce Enforcing




Running the application on Astra Linux OS in closed
software environment mode
This section describes how to start the application in the Astra Linux Special Edition operating system in closed
software environment mode.


For Astra Linux Special Edition (updates 1.6, 1.7, and 1.8)

To run the application in the Astra Linux Special Edition operating system (updates 1.6, 1.7 or 1.8):

 1. Specify the following setting in the /etc/digsig/digsig_initramfs.conf file:
   DIGSIG_ELF_MODE=1

 2. Install the compatibility package:
   apt install astra-digsig-oldkeys

 3. Create a directory for the application key:
   mkdir -p /etc/digsig/keys/legacy/kaspersky/

 4. Locate the application key (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/shared/kaspersky_astra_pub_key.gpg) in the directory
    created at the previous step:
   cp kaspersky_astra_pub_key.gpg /etc/digsig/keys/legacy/kaspersky/

 5. Update the initramfs image:
   update-initramfs -u -k all

 6. Restart the operating system.


For Astra Linux Special Edition (operational update 1.5)

To run the application in the Astra Linux Special Edition (operational update 1.5) operating system:

 1. Specify the following setting in the /etc/digsig/digsig_initramfs.conf file:
   DIGSIG_LOAD_KEYS=1
   DIGSIG_ENFORCE=1

 2. Create a directory for the application key:
   mkdir -p /etc/digsig/keys/legacy/kaspersky/

 3. Locate the application key (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/shared/kaspersky_astra_pub_key.gpg) in the directory
    created at the previous step:
   cp kaspersky_astra_pub_key.gpg /etc/digsig/keys/legacy/kaspersky/


                                                          72
 4. Update the initramfs image:
   sudo update-initramfs -u -k all

 5. Restart the operating system.

The application graphical user interface can be used during mandatory access control sessions.




Running the application on ALT SP in closed software
environment mode
This section describes how to start the application in the ALT SP operating system in closed software environment
mode.

To run the application on the ALT SP operating system:

 1. Disable the closed software environment mode, if enabled, by running the following command:
   integrity-remover

 2. Create a kesl group for further changes to the IMA policy by running the following command:
   groupadd kesl

 3. Find out the unique identifier (GUID) of the created group by running the following command:
   cat /etc/group | grep kesl

 4. Edit the IMA policy to exclude the kesl group. To do so:

    a. Copy the /usr/share/integrity/policy file by running the following command:
       cp /usr/share/integrity/policy /etc/integrity/policy

    b. Edit the /etc/integrity/policy file using a text editor (for example, vim) by running the following command:
       vim /etc/integrity/policy

    c. After the line dont_measure fsmagic=0xf97cff8c (usually this is the last line in the dont_measure
       section), add the line dont_measure fgroup=<GUID>, where <GUID> is the unique identifier of the group
       created at step 2 of these instructions).

    d. After the line dont_appraise fsmagic=0x27e0eb (usually this is the last line in the dont_appraise
       section), add the line dont_appraise fgroup=<GUID>, where <GUID> is the unique identifier of the group
       created at step 2 of these instructions).

    e. Save your changes.

 5. In the /usr/sbin/integrity-sign file, edit the list_all_files function to include the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
    application in the allowlist of applications that are allowed to run in the closed environment mode. To do so:

    a. Edit the /usr/sbin/integrity-sign file using a text editor (for example, vim) by running the following command:
       vim /usr/sbin/integrity-sign




                                                          73
   b. Find the list_all_files function and in the body of the function, in lines starting with find -P, add the
      directories of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application under /var/opt and /opt to the end of each
      enumeration of directories.

   c. Save your changes.

6. Install the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application. To make sure that the application database update works
   correctly after the installation, at the initial configuration stage, refuse to start the application database update
   (to do this, enter 'no' at the application database update step).

 7. Assign the inheritance of the kesl group and directory permissions for the updatable components of the
    Kaspersky Endpoint Security application by running the following commands:
   cd /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/< build number _*>/var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private
   chown -R root:kesl updates/
   find updates -type d -exec chmod g+s {} \;
   cd /opt/kaspersky/kesl/lib64
   chown -R root:kesl updatable_modules/
   find updatable_modules -type d -exec chmod g+s {} \;
   cd /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/
   chown -R root:kesl temp/
   find temp -type d -exec chmod g+s {} \;

8. Assign the inheritance of the kesl group and directory permissions for the updatable components of the
   Network Agent by running the following commands:
   cd /var/opt/kaspersky/
   chown -R root:kesl klnagent/
   find klnagent/ -type d -exec chmod g+s {} \;
   cd /opt/kaspersky/
   chown -R root:kesl klnagent64/
   find klnagent64/ -type d -exec chmod g+s {} \;

9. Enable the closed software environment mode by initiating the signing of the system using the following
   command:
   integrity-applier -i -A

10. Make sure that the IMA subsystem is activated by running the following command:
   cat /proc/cmdline
  The command output should contain the lines lsm=integrity ima_hash=sha512
  ima_appraise=enforce.

11. Start the database update task by running the following command:
   kesl-control --start 6 -W
  If the output contains the EventType=BasesApplied event, it means the database update was performed
  correctly.
  If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, wait until the application
  databases are automatically updated. You can view information about the database update using the kesl-
  control --app-info command. The output includes information about whether the application databases
  were loaded and the time of the last release of the application databases.

                                                         74
12. Restart the application by running the following command:
   systemctl restart kesl




Configuring the OSnova operating system for the
application to work

For OSnova 2.4

To prepare a device with the OSnova 2.4 operating system for remote installation of the Network Agent:

 1. Open the /etc/systemd/logind.conf file and in the [Login] section, comment out the
    #KillUserProcesses=yes line.

 2. Open the file /usr/lib/NESS/pam-user-session and comment out the #loginctl terminate-session
    "$XDG_SESSION_ID" line.

To run the application on the OSnova 2.4 operating system:

 1. Open the /etc/NESS/systemd/kesl.service.config file and set
    NESSCTX_MODIFY=t+ADDEQUSOCK,OMIT,70,SSUID_SAVE_CTX_PERMANENT".

 2. Refresh the service settings by running the systemctl daemon-reload command.

 3. If you want to run process memory and kernel memory scans, you need to disable the mprotect (or PaX)
    memory protection in the kernel, that is, add mprotect=off to the kernel command line parameters. For more
    details, please refer to the OSnova documentation .

 4. Restart the operating system.

After installing the graphical interface (the kesl-gui package), run the following commands on the command line as
root:

rm /etc/xdg/autostart/kaspersky-kesl.desktop

cp /opt/kaspersky/kesl/resource/autostart.desktop /etc/xdg/autostart/kaspersky-
kesl.desktop

rm /usr/share/applications/kaspersky-kesl.desktop

cp /opt/kaspersky/kesl/resource/app.desktop /usr/share/applications/kaspersky-
kesl.desktop

rm /usr/share/autostart/kaspersky-kesl.desktop

cp /opt/kaspersky/kesl/resource/autostart.desktop /usr/share/autostart/kaspersky-
kesl.desktop

rm /usr/share/kde4/services/ServiceMenus/kaspersky-kesl.desktop

cp /opt/kaspersky/kesl/resource/kde.desktop
/usr/share/kde4/services/ServiceMenus/kaspersky-kesl.desktop
                                                       75
rm /usr/share/kservices5/ServiceMenus/kaspersky-kesl.desktop

cp /opt/kaspersky/kesl/resource/kde.desktop /usr/share/kservices5/ServiceMenus/kaspersky-
kesl.desktop

rm /usr/share/Thunar/sendto/kaspersky-kesl.desktop

cp /opt/kaspersky/kesl/resource/sendto.desktop /usr/share/Thunar/sendto/kaspersky-
kesl.desktop


For OSnova 2.5.1 and later

To prepare a device with the OSnova operating system 2.5.1 and later for remote installation of the Network Agent:

 1. Open the file /usr/lib/systemd/logind.conf.d/10-enable-kill-user-processes.conf and in the [Login] section,
    comment out the #KillUserProcesses=yes line.

 2. Open the file /usr/lib/NESS/pam-user-session and comment out the #loginctl terminate-session
    "$XDG_SESSION_ID" line.

To run the application on the OSnova operating system 2.5.1 and later:

 1. Open the /etc/NESS/systemd/kesl.service.config file and set
    NESSCTX_MODIFY="t+ADDEQUSOCK,OMIT,OMIT_PID,SSUID_SAVE_CTX_PERMANENT".

 2. Refresh the service settings by running the systemctl daemon-reload command.

 3. Open the file /etc/sysctl.d/30-disable-ptrace.conf and set kernel.yama.ptrace_scope=0.

 4. If you want to run process memory and kernel memory scans, you need to disable the mprotect (or PaX)
    memory protection in the kernel, that is, add mprotect=off to the kernel command line parameters. For more
    details, please refer to the OSnova documentation .

 5. Restart the operating system.




                                                       76
Updating the application from a previous
version
You can only upgrade to Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux from Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.1 for Linux.

Upgrading earlier Kaspersky Endpoint Security versions to version 12.2 is not supported. If you have an earlier
version of Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed, you need to first uninstall it and then install Kaspersky Endpoint
Security 12.2 for Linux.

You need to prepare to install before installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

The application update procedure involves the following steps:

   1   Updating the Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent

       If you are managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky Security Center, you must update the
       Network Agent on the protected devices. The update is performed by installing a new version of Network Agent.

       If the Network Agent is not updated, the application cannot be managed using Kaspersky Security Center.


         On a device running the Astra Linux Special Edition operating system, we recommend to update Network
         Agent remotely using Kaspersky Security Center, since updating using the command line in the Kaspersky
         Security Center administration console creates a new copy of the same managed device, and the old one
         becomes inaccessible.


       The application continues working correctly during the Network Agent update.

  2    Updating the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-in

       If you are managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky Security Center, you must update the
       Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in or MMC plug-in, depending on the console that you are
       using to manage Kaspersky Security Center.

  3    Updating the application and graphical user interface on protected devices

       You must update the application installed on protected devices. The updated application retains the application
       usage mode that was selected during installation. If you want to use the application in a different mode, you must
       uninstall the application and then perform the installation and initial configuration of the application.

       If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is being used in Standard mode and you are using the graphical user interface of
       the application, you must also update the graphical user interface.

       You can update the application and the application's graphical user interface in the following ways:

          Remotely using Kaspersky Security Center.

          Locally from the command line.


  If an error occurs while updating the application, the update is rolled back and the previous version of the
  application is started. In this case, an error message will be displayed, but the package manager (rpm/dpkg) will
  indicate the new version.




                                                          77
Even if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is launched before the update process start, if the update is completed
successfully, a new application version is launched.

When you update the application to a newer version, the dump files of the previous version are deleted.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is being used in Standard mode, we recommend starting the database update
  task after updating the application.




Updating Kaspersky Endpoint Security management
plug-ins
The administration plug-in for Kaspersky Endpoint Security is updated by installing the new version of the
administration plug-in. Depending on the Kaspersky Security Center administration console that you use, you have
to install:

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security management MMC plug-in

Policies and tasks configured for previous versions of Kaspersky Endpoint Security are not compatible with the
updated version of the application. If you use the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console to manage
the application, then after updating the MMC management plug-in, you can convert policies and tasks using the
Kaspersky Security Center Policies and Tasks Batch Conversion Wizard (for details, see the Kaspersky Security
Center Help ).

The converted policies and tasks have names "<Original policy/task name> (converted)".

For most settings, converted policies and tasks use the values configured for the previous version of the
application. Some settings are assigned special values. The settings that were not configured in the policies and
tasks of the previous version take default values in the converted policies and tasks.

The procedure for converting policies and tasks is not available in Kaspersky Security Center Web Console. If you
use the Web Console to manage the application, you must create new policies and tasks for the application in
Kaspersky Security Center. You can migrate some values of settings of policies and tasks from a previous version
of a policy or task to a new one by exporting and importing settings.

Management plug-ins of the previous version continue to work after installing the new version of Kaspersky
Endpoint Security management plug-ins. You can use them to manage the previous version of Kaspersky Endpoint
Security.

If you have updated the application on all client devices, you can uninstall the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
administration plug-ins of the previous version.

When installing a new build of the MMC management plug-in for the same version of the application, you must first
uninstall the currently installed MMC plug-in of this version, and then install the new MMC plug-in of this version.




                                                        78
Updating the application using Kaspersky Security
Center
The application and graphical interface are updated by remotely installing the new version of the application
packages and graphical interface on the protected device.


  The graphical interface is not supported if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to
  protect virtual environments.


Updating using Kaspersky Security Center involves the following steps:

 1. Creating an installation package.
   For the remote installation, Kaspersky Endpoint Security installation package is used. You can create the
   installation package using the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console or the Administration Console.

 2. Deploying the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on devices in the corporate network.
   Kaspersky Security Center Web Console supports the following main deployment methods:

      Installing the application using the Protection Deployment Wizard.

      Installing the application using the remote installation task.

   The Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console supports the following main deployment methods:

      Installing the application using the Remote Installation Wizard.

      Installing the application using the remote installation task.

   For a description of the deployment procedures, see the Kaspersky Security Center Help.




Updating the application using the command line
Updating the application using the command line is performed by installing a new version of the application on the
device from an RPM or DEB format package depending on the type of package manager.


  The graphical interface is not supported if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to
  protect virtual environments.




                                                         79
If the terms and conditions of the End User License Agreement and/or the Privacy Policy have changed in the new
version of the application, you must accept the new terms and conditions during the update. Read the new version
of the End User License Agreement and/or the Privacy Policy:

   The new version of the End User License Agreement is located in the ~/.kesl/<application
   version>/license.<language ID> directory.

   The new version of the Privacy Policy is located in the ~/.kesl/<application version>/license.<language
   ID> directory.

If you do not accept the conditions of the End User License Agreement and/or the Privacy Policy, the application
will not be updated.

If the terms of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement changed in the new version of the application, you need
to accept or decline the new terms of use for participating in Kaspersky Security Network. Read the new version of
the document located in the ~/.kesl/<application version>/ksn_license.<language ID> directory. Refusal to
participate in Kaspersky Security Network does not interrupt the Kaspersky Endpoint Security update process.
You can enable, disable, or change Kaspersky Security Network mode later.

If you used KSN and accepted the conditions of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement in a previous version
of the application, you need to accept the conditions of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement when
updating the application. Otherwise, use of KSN will be disabled.

To accept the terms of the new agreements during the upgrade, use the variables KESL_EULA_AGREED=yes,
KESL_PRIVACY_POLICY_AGREED=yes, and KESL_USE_KSN=yes/no.

To update the application:

 1. Install the application package using the following command, depending on the package manager. If you have
    the graphical user interface of the previous version of the application installed, then you also need to start the
    package containing the files of the graphical user interface.

      For an RPM package:
      # [KESL_EULA_AGREED=yes] [KESL_PRIVACY_POLICY_AGREED=yes] [KESL_USE_KSN=yes/no] rpm
      -U --replacefiles --replacepkgs kesl-12.2.0-< build number >.<arch>.rpm [kesl-gui-
      12.2.0-< build number >.<arch>.rpm]
      where <arch> is the architecture type:

         i386 – for 32-bit operating systems

         x86_64 – for 64-bit operating systems

         aarch64 – for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture


        On an operating system with a package manager of the RPM type, if the application package and the
        GUI package are both installed, we do not recommend updating only one of the packages without the
        other.


      For a DEB package:
      # [KESL_EULA_AGREED=yes] [KESL_PRIVACY_POLICY_AGREED=yes] [KESL_USE_KSN=yes/no] apt-
      get install ./kesl_12.2.0-< build number >_<arch>.deb [./kesl-gui_12.2.0-< build
      number >_<arch>.deb]


                                                         80
       where <arch> is the architecture type:

           i386 – for 32-bit operating systems

           amd64 – for 64-bit operating systems

           arm64 – for 64-bit operating systems for the Arm architecture


          On an operating system with a package manager of the dpkg type, if the application package and the
          GUI package are both installed, either of the packages cannot be updated without the other.


 2. Kaspersky Endpoint Security will restart automatically.

  Example:
  Update the RPM application package with the GUI package for 64-bit operating systems:

  # KESL_EULA_AGREED=yes KESL_PRIVACY_POLICY_AGREED=yes KESL_USE_KSN=yes rpm -U --replacefiles --replacepkgs kesl-
  12.2.0-< build number >.x86_64.rpm kesl-gui-12.2.0-< build number >.x86_64.rpm


If you use the command line to manage the application, then after upgrading, most application settings use the
values configured for the previous version of the application. Some settings are assigned special values. Settings
that were missing in the previous version of the application take on default values in the new version of the
application.


  Changes to the application settings made after the update is complete and before the application restarts
  are not saved.




Special considerations when setting parameter values
when updating the application
If you use Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console to manage the application, you can convert policies
and tasks to use the values of policy and task settings configured for the previous version of the application (for
more information, see the Kaspersky Security Center Help ). The procedure for converting policies and tasks is
not available in Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

After updating the application using the command line, most settings carry over from the previous version of the
application. You can also migrate application settings by exporting settings to a file and then importing them from
that file.

Default values are assigned to settings that did not exist in the previous version of the application. Some settings
are assigned special values.




                                                                     81
Kaspersky Security Network settings

After converting a policy in the MMC plug-in, the Kaspersky Security Network settings in the policy properties
depend on whether you accepted or rejected the terms of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement in the
Policies and Tasks Batch Conversion Wizard:

   If you accepted the terms of the Statement, the Extended KSN mode option is selected.

   If you rejected the terms of the Statement, the Do not use KSN option is selected.

The conversion of policies is not supported by the web plug-in.

After upgrading the application on the command line, the UseKSN setting is set to No if when updating you set
KESL_USE_KSN=No, and UseKSN=Extended is applied if you set KESL_USE_KSN=Yes. In other cases, the value of
the UseKSN setting does not change after the update.


Cloud mode settings

After converting a policy in the MMC plug-in, the settings for using cloud mode may change depending on whether
you accepted or rejected the terms of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement in the Policies and Tasks Batch
Conversion Wizard:

   If you accepted the terms of the Statement, the Enable cloud mode check box will be selected.

   If you rejected the terms of the Statement, the Enable cloud mode check box will be cleared.

The conversion of policies is not supported by the web plug-in.

After updating the application on the command line, CloudMode is set to:

   CloudMode=No if UseKSN=No after the upgrade.

   CloudMode=Yes if UseKSN=Basic/Extended was set after the update and CloudMode=Yes was set before
   the update.

Cloud mode is available if use of KSN is enabled. To enable cloud mode:

   If using the MMC or web plug-in, select the Extended KSN mode option and select the Enable cloud mode
   check box.

   When using the command line, set the UseKSN parameter to Basic or Extended and the CloudMode
   parameter to Yes.




                                                       82
Uninstalling the application
Uninstalling Kaspersky Endpoint Security involves the following steps:

   1   Uninstalling the application and graphical interface of the application

       Uninstall the packages of the application and, if you are using the graphical interface, the packages of the
       graphical interface from the protected devices.

       You can uninstall both the application package and the graphical interface package, or uninstall only the graphical
       interface package. It is not possible to uninstall only the application package if the graphical interface package is
       installed.

       You can uninstall the application and the application's graphical interface in the following ways:

          Remotely using Kaspersky Security Center.

          Locally from the command line.


         While the application is being uninstalled, all Kaspersky Endpoint Security tasks will be stopped on the
         device.


   2   Removing Network Agent

       If you were using Kaspersky Security Center to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you must uninstall the
       Network Agent from protected devices.

       You can uninstall Network Agent in the following ways:

          Remotely using Kaspersky Security Center.

          Locally from the command line.

   3   Uninstalling the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-in

       If you were using Kaspersky Security Center to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you must uninstall the
       Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration web plug-in or MMC plug-in, depending on the console that you
       were using to manage Kaspersky Security Center.


  After removing the application, all information saved by the application is deleted, except for the license
  database. Installed application certificates are also removed. The license database is saved, and you can use it
  to reinstall the application.


If the application was installed in a systemd, the systemd settings are restored to their initial state after the
application uninstallation.




Uninstalling the application and Network Agent using
Kaspersky Security Center
You can remotely uninstall Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Network Agent from the client devices.


                                                           83
Uninstallation is performed using the remote uninstallation of applications task in Kaspersky Security Center Web
Console or in the Administration Console. For more details, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.


  If you want to remove only the graphical user interface without removing the application, specify the
  USE_GUI=No setting value in the autoinstall.ini configuration file and start the remote application installation
  task.


Uninstallation is performed in the background. After the application uninstallation finishes, you will be prompted to
restart the client device.




Uninstalling the application using the command line

Removing the application package and the graphical user interface package

To uninstall the application and the graphical interface installed from the RPM packages, run the following
command:

  # rpm -e kesl kesl-gui


To uninstall the application and the graphical interface installed from the DEB packages, run the following
command:

  # apt-get purge kesl kesl-gui


Uninstalling the application package without the graphical user interface package

To uninstall the application installed from the RPM package without removing the graphical interface, run the
following command:

  # rpm -e kesl


To uninstall the application installed from the DEB package without removing the graphical user interface, run the
following command:

  # apt-get purge kesl



Removing the graphical user interface package

To remove the graphical interface that was installed from an RPM package, run the following command:

  # rpm -e kesl-gui


To remove the graphical interface that was installed from a DEB package, run the following command:

  # apt-get purge kesl-gui



                                                        84
After the uninstallation procedure is complete, a message about the results of the uninstallation is displayed.




Network Agent removal using the command line
To uninstall the Network Agent installed on a 32-bit operating system from an RPM package, run the following
command:

  # rpm -e klnagent


To uninstall the Network Agent installed on a 64-bit operating system from an RPM package, run the following
command:

  # rpm -e klnagent64


To uninstall the Network Agent installed on a 32-bit operating system from a DEB package, run the following
command:

  # apt-get purge klnagent


To uninstall the Network Agent installed on a 64-bit operating system from a DEB package, run the following
command:

  # apt-get purge klnagent64


After the uninstallation procedure is complete, a message about the results of the uninstallation is displayed.




Uninstalling the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
management plug-ins
The Kaspersky Endpoint Security web management plug-in is uninstalled in Kaspersky Security Center Web
Console from the list of installed plug-ins (Settings → Web Plug-ins).

To remove the Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in:

 1. Close the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console.

 2. On the device where the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed, open the Windows
    registry editor and go to
    HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Wow6432Node\KasperskyLab\Components\28\Plugins.
   This key contains information about all management plug-ins installed in the Administration Console. The name
   of the managed application is in the DisplayName value.

 3. Select the section corresponding to the relevant version of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application plug-
    in.

 4. Open and copy the UninstallString value.

 5. Open the command prompt as administrator, paste the copied value and press Enter.
                                                        85
86
Application licensing
This section contains information about the basic concepts associated with licensing Kaspersky applications, as
well as information about the specifics of activating the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.

After activating the application, we recommend monitoring the license validity period in order to renew the license
in a timely manner when necessary. You can use Kaspersky Security Center or the command line on a protected
device to view information about license keys used by Kaspersky Endpoint Security.




About the End User License Agreement
The End User License Agreement is a binding agreement between you and AO Kaspersky Lab, stipulating the terms
on which you may use the application.


  Read through the terms of the End User License Agreement carefully before you start using the application.


You can review the terms of the End User License Agreement for the Kaspersky Endpoint Security solution and
the Privacy Policy, which describes the processing and transmission of data, in the following ways:

   By reading the text in the license.<language ID> file. This file is included in the application distribution kit.

   During Kaspersky Endpoint Security installation.


     By confirming your consent to the text of the End User License Agreement and Privacy Policy when
     creating the application installation package (if installed using Kaspersky Security Center) or during the
     initial application configuration (if installing using the command line), you accept the terms of the End User
     License Agreement and Privacy Policy If you do not accept the terms of the End User License Agreement
     or Privacy Policy, you must cancel the installation of the application and may not use the application.


   After installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
   After the application is installed, the files containing the text of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security End User
   License Agreement and the Privacy Policy are located on the protected device in the
   /opt/kaspersky/kesl/doc/license.<language ID> folder.




About the license
A license is a time-limited right to use Kaspersky Endpoint Security, granted under the End User License
Agreement.

The list of available functions and the validity period of the application depend on the license under which the
application is used.




                                                            87
The following license types are provided:

   Trial – a free license intended for trying out the application.
   Trial licenses have a short validity period. When the trial license expires, all Kaspersky Endpoint Security
   features become disabled. To continue using the application, you need to purchase a commercial license.
   You can use the application under a trial license for only one trial period.

   Commercial is a paid license.
   The main functions of the application stop working when a commercial license expires. To continue using
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you need to renew the commercial license. After the license expires, you can no
   longer use the application and must uninstall it from the device.
   It is recommended to renew the license before its expiration date to ensure continued protection of your
   device against security threats.

To activate the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application, you need a license that covers the basic functionality of
the application. The main license can also include additional functionality of the application (for example, the
Integration with Kaspersky Detection and Response solutions functionality). If the main license which you are using
for the application does not cover the additional functionality that you need, you must purchase a separate license
to activate the additional functionality.

To clarify the range of functionality included in the main license and the additional functionality license, please
contact the Kaspersky partner from which you are purchasing the license.




About the License certificate
The License Certificate is a document provided together with the key file or activation code.

A license certificate contains the following information about the license provided:

   License ID or order number

   Information about the license user

   Information about the application that can be activated under the provided license

   Restrictions on the number of licensing units (for example, devices on which the application can be used under
   the license)

   License validity start date

   License expiration date or validity period

   License type




About the license key
The license key is a sequence of bits that can be used to activate the application for further usage in accordance
with the terms of the End User License Agreement. License key is generated by Kaspersky experts.

                                                          88
To activate the application, you need the main license key. If the main license which you are using for the
application does not include the additional functionality that you need (for example, Kaspersky Endpoint Detection
and Response Optimum functionality), you also need a license key to activate the additional functionality.

You can add a license key to the protected device using one of the following methods: by applying a key file or by
entering an activation code. After you add a key to the protected device, the license key is displayed in the
application interface as a unique alphanumeric sequence.

The license key may be blocked by Kaspersky, if the terms of the End User License Agreement are violated. If the
license key is blocked, add another license key for proper application operation.

A license key can be added as an active key or as a reserve key.

   Active license key is currently used to run the application. A trial license key, commercial license key (commercial
   key), or subscription key can be added as the active key. You can add only one main license key as the active key.
   You can have multiple active license keys for additional functionality.

   Reserve license key is a license key that entitles the user to use the application, but is not currently in use. The
   reserve license key automatically becomes active when the license associated with the current active license
   key expires.
   To extend the term of the application's main license, you can add a reserve key for the basic functionality. If you
   have activated additional functionality under a separate license, you can also add a reserve key for additional
   functionality.
   A reserve license key can be added only if an active license key of the same type is already added.


     A trial license key can only be added as an active license key. A trial license key or a subscription key cannot
     be added as a reserve license key.




About the activation code
An activation code is a unique sequence of twenty Latin letters and numbers. You have to enter an activation code
in order to add a license key for activating Kaspersky Endpoint Security. You receive the activation code at the
email address that you provided when you bought Kaspersky Endpoint Security or requested the trial version of
Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

To activate the application with an activation code, you need Internet access in order to connect to Kaspersky
activation servers.

If you lost your activation code after activating the application, contact the Kaspersky partner from whom you
purchased the license.




About the key file
A key file is a file with the .key extension that you receive from Kaspersky. Key files are intended to add a license key
for activating the application.

You receive a key file at the email address that you provided when you bought Kaspersky Endpoint Security or
ordered the trial version of Kaspersky Endpoint Security.


                                                          89
You do not need to connect to Kaspersky activation servers in order to activate the application with a key file.

You can restore a key file if it has been accidentally deleted. You may need a key file to register a Kaspersky
CompanyAccount, for example.

To restore your key file, perform any of the following actions:

   Contact the license seller.

   Get the key file on the Kaspersky website     when you have an activation code.




About subscription
Subscription for Kaspersky Endpoint Security is a purchase order for the application with specific settings
(subscription expiry date, number of devices protected). You can order a subscription for Kaspersky Endpoint
Security from your service provider (such as your internet service provider). You can renew or cancel your
subscription. You can manage your subscription on the website of the service provider.

Subscription can be limited (for one year, for example) or unlimited (without an expiry date). To continue using the
application after the limited subscription expires, you need to renew your subscription. Unlimited subscription
is renewed automatically if the vendor's services have been prepaid on time.

Upon a limited subscription's expiry, you may be offered a grace period to renew the subscription. During this
period the application retains its functionality. The service provider decides whether or not to grant a grace period
and, if so, determines the duration of the grace period.


  The set of options for managing your subscription may vary depending on your service provider. The service
  provider might not provide a grace period for renewing the subscription where the application retains its
  functionality.


To use Kaspersky Endpoint Security under a subscription, you need to use the activation code received from the
service provider. After you apply the activation code, an active key corresponding to the license to use the
application under subscription is added to the application. A reserve key can only be added when you use an
activation code and cannot be added for a key file or subscription.


  Activation codes purchased under subscription may not be used to activate previous versions of Kaspersky
  Endpoint Security.




Comparison of application features across different
licenses

  Application feature comparison is based on solutions based on Intel architecture processors. For information
  on licenses and available functionality for solutions based on Arm architecture, please contact your service
  provider in your region.



                                                         90
The available functionality of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application depends on the type of the main
license.

The main license of the application may cover basic as well as additional functionality of the application. For
example, the "Kaspersky Optimum Security" license allows you to activate the main protection and control
components, as well as the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Integration functionality.

You can use separate licenses for additional functionality of the application, for example, a license to activate the
Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform functionality.

To clarify the range of functionality included in the main license and the additional functionality license, please
contact the Kaspersky partner from which you are purchasing the license.

Open the list of solution functions covered by the main application licenses


  To integrate with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform components, you need to activate the Kaspersky
  Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution (see the solution help for more details). The main licenses for
  Kaspersky Endpoint Security let you activate only the integration functionality.




Application activation and license key management
Activation is the process of giving effect to license that allows you to use a fully functional version of the
application until the license expires.

To activate the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on a protected device, you need to add main license key
to the application.

If the main license which you are using for the application does not cover the additional Kaspersky Endpoint
Security functionality that you need, you also need to add a license key to activate the additional functionality:

   A separate license key, "Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Add-on" (hereinafter also
   referred to as the "EDR Optimum key"), to activate the Kaspersky EDR Optimum component.

   A separate license key, "Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Add-on" (hereinafter also referred
   to as the "KUMA key"), to activate the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform functionality.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the application
  does not need to be activated. You only activate Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent. Activation
  is performed on the Protection Server side (a component of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light
  Agent) by adding the license key on the SVM. A license key for activating additional functionality is also added
  to the SVM, if necessary.




                                                          91
If you did not activate the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application during installation (by adding a key to the
installation package or by completing the initial configuration), you need to activate the installed application in one
of the following ways:

   Remotely, using Kaspersky Security Center:

      Using the Add key task.

      By distributing a license key stored on the Administration Server to the client devices.

   On the command line using administration commands.

To add an additional functionality license key to the application, you can also use the Add key task, the procedure
for distributing a key to client devices, or license key management commands. Adding a key that provides the
additional functionality is no different from adding the main license key for the application.


  A key for additional functionality can be added only after adding the main license key for the application.


You can also add a reserve key for the basic functionality of the application and a reserve key for the additional
functionality. A reserve key becomes active when the license associated with the active key expires or when the
active key is deleted. Availability of a reserve key allows you to avoid application functionality limitation when your
license expires.


  A reserve license key can be added only after adding an active license key.


You can view information about license keys remotely added to the application using Kaspersky Security Center or
the command line on a protected device.

You can also use the graphical user interface to activate the application and manage license keys.



Activating the application using Kaspersky Security Center
You can add license keys to the application through Kaspersky Security Center in the following ways:

   Using the Add key task.
   This method allows you to add a license key to a specific device or the devices included in an administration
   group. When creating a task, it uses the key that is added to the Kaspersky Security Center key store. You can
   add a license key to the key store in advance or when creating the activation task.

   By distributing a license key stored on Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server to the client devices.
   This method lets you automatically add a key to the client devices that are already connected to Kaspersky
   Security Center, and to new client devices. To use this method, first add the key to the Kaspersky Security
   Center key store.

You can use the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console or Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console to
create tasks for adding a key to the application, adding a key to the key store, and distributing the key to the client
devices.




                                                          92
Adding keys using the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console.

To add a key to Kaspersky Security Center key storage using the Web Console:

 1. In the Web Console main window, select Operations → Kaspersky Licenses.

 2. Click Add.

 3. In the window that opens, select how to add the key to the repository:

      Enter the activation code to add a key using an activation code.

      Add a key file to add a key using a key file.

 4. Depending on the key adding method you selected at the previous step, do one of the following:

      Enter the activation code and click Submit.

      Click the Select key file button and in the window that opens, select a file with the .key extension.

 5. Click Close.

  The added key will appear in the list of keys.


To add a key to the application via the Web Console using an Add Key task:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Tasks.
   The list of tasks opens.

 2. Click Add.
   The Task Wizard starts.

 3. Configure the task settings:

    a. In the Application drop-down list, select the application name: Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

    b. In the Task type drop-down list, select Add Key.

    c. In the Task name field, enter a brief description, such as Activation of Kaspersky Endpoint
       Security.

    d. In the Devices to which the task will be assigned section, select the task scope. Click Next.

 4. Select devices according to the selected task scope option. Click Next.
   The Kaspersky Security Center key storage window opens.

 5. If you have previously added a key to Kaspersky Security Center key storage, select the key from in the list and
    click Next.




                                                          93
 6. If the required key cannot be found in the key storage, click the Add key button.

    a. In the window that opens, select how to add the key to the repository:

          Enter the activation code to add a key using an activation code.

          Add a key file to add a key using a key file.

    b. Depending on the key adding method you selected at the previous step, do one of the following:

          Enter the activation code and click Submit.

          Click the Select key file button and in the window that opens, select a file with the .key extension.

    c. Read the information about the key and click Close.

    d. The added key will appear in the list of keys. Select it from the list and click Next.

 7. Read the information about the license and click Next.

 8. Complete the wizard.
   A new task will be displayed in the list of tasks.

 9. Select the check box next to the task. Click the Start button.

In the properties of the Add key task, you can add a reserve key to the application. A reserve key becomes active
when the license associated with the active key expires or when the active key is deleted. Availability of a reserve
key allows you to avoid application functionality limitation when your license expires.


  If you are adding a reserve key but no active key has been added to the application yet, the task ends with an
  error.


To add a key using the Web Console by distributing a key stored on the Administration Server to the devices:

 1. In the Web Console main window, select Operations → Kaspersky Licenses.

 2. Open the key properties using the link with the name of the application for that the key is intended to.

 3. On the General tab, select the Automatically distribute a license key to managed devices check box.

 4. Click Save.

  The license key is automatically distributed to the appropriate client devices.



  A new license key is added to a device only if the application has not yet been activated on the device or if the
  license expires in less than 14 days.


During the automatic distribution of a key as an active or a reserve key, the licensing limit on the number of devices
(set in the key properties) is taken into account. If the licensing limit is reached, distribution of this key to the
devices stops automatically. You can view the number of devices to which the key has been added and other
information in the key properties on the Devices tab.


                                                           94
Special considerations for the activation process in Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console

A trial version is provided for the Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console. The trial version is a special version of
Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console designed to familiarize a user with the features of Cloud Console. In this
version, you can perform actions in a workspace for a period of 30 days. All managed applications, including
Kaspersky Endpoint Security, are automatically activated under Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console trial
license. However, you cannot activate Kaspersky Endpoint Security using its own trial license when the trial license
for the Cloud Console expires. For more details about Cloud Console, please refer to Kaspersky Security Center
Cloud Console documentation.


  The trial version of Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console does not allow you to subsequently switch to a
  commercial version. Any trial workspace will be automatically deleted with all its contents after the 30-day
  period expires.




License key management in the command line
To manage license keys on a device, you can use license key management commands.


  The commands for managing license keys can be executed only if the application is used in standard mode. If
  Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, commands for
  managing license keys finish with an error. You activate the application as part of Kaspersky Security for
  Virtualization Light Agent, and therefore do not need to activate the application separately.


To add an active license key to the application, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --add-active-key < path to key file / activation code >


  where:


   <path to the key file> – path to the key file. If the key file is located in the current directory, it is sufficient
   to specify only the file name.

   <activation code> – activation code.

To add a reserve license key to the application, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --add-reserve-key < path to key file / activation code >



  If an active key has not yet been added to the application on the device, the command fails.


You can use the add key command to add main license keys of the application as well as license keys for additional
functionality. You do not need to specify the type of the key in the command.

Different commands are provided for removing the main license keys and additional functionality keys.

To remove an active main key, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --remove-active-key
                                                         95
To remove a reserve main key, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --remove-reserve-key


To remove an active EDR Optimum key, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --remove-active-key --edr-optimum


To remove a reserve EDR Optimum key, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --remove-reserve-key --edr-optimum


To remove an active KUMA key, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --remove-active-key --kuma


To remove a reserve KUMA key, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-L] --remove-reserve-key --kuma




Viewing information about used license keys
You can view information about the license keys being used by Kaspersky Endpoint Security in the following ways:

   In Kaspersky Security Center, in the properties of the Add key task.
   In the properties of the Add key task, you can find information about the key that this task adds to the
   application.

   In Kaspersky Security Center, in the properties of the relevant Kaspersky application installed on the client
   device.
   In the properties of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on the protected device, you can find
   information about the active and reserve keys added to the application on this device. You can view the
   properties of the application using the Web Console as well as the Administration Console.

   In Kaspersky Security Center, in the license key usage report.
   You can view the license key usage report using the Web Console (Monitoring & reporting → Reports), as well
   as the Administration Console (Reports tab). To view the report, you need to select the "Report on usage of
   license keys" template in the list of reports and start generating the report.

   In Kaspersky Security Center, in the Kaspersky Security Center license key store.
   You can open the key store using the Web Console (Operations → Kaspersky licenses) or using the
   Administration Console (Kaspersky licenses folder). The store displays information about all keys added to
   Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server.

   On a device with Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed. You can view information about the license used by the
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on the command line.

You can also use notifications about Kaspersky Security Center events to get information about the used license
keys and the licenses associated with them. The application sends information about expired licenses and license
violations to the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server.

                                                        96
If you use the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application in standard mode and you use Kaspersky Security Center
to manage the application, by default, information about license keys being added and removed and about license
term expiration is recorded in the operating system log.



Viewing information about license keys on a device using the Web
Console
To view information about license keys added to the device in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. In the list, find the device for which you want to view information and click the device name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

 6. This opens the application properties window; in that window, select the General tab and go to the Licenses
    section.
   This section displays information about license keys added to the application and the licenses associated with
   these keys.

      License key status is the status of the key: active or reserve.

      Application name is the name of the license associated with the key and information about this license.

      License key is the license key, a unique alphanumeric sequence.

      License type can be trial, commercial, or subscription.

      Activation date is the date when this key was added.

      Expiration date is the date when your right to use the application activated by adding this key expires.




                                                          97
Viewing information about license keys on a device using the
Administration Console
To view information about the license keys added to the device in Kaspersky Security Center Administration
Console:

 1. In the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the
    administration group containing the required device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the required device and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task
    name> window.

 4. In the window that opens with the properties of the managed device, select the Applications section.
   The right part of the window displays a list of Kaspersky applications installed on the device.

 5. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security and double-click it to open the application properties window.
    Alternatively, you can use the Properties button in the lower part of the window.

 6. This opens a window; in that window, go to the License keys section.
   This section contains information about the active and reserve license keys:

      Serial number – unique alphanumeric sequence.

      Status – The status of the license key, for example active or reserve.

      Type: type of license (commercial or trial).

      License validity period — Number of days during which you can use the application activated by adding this
      key.

      License limit — Number of devices on which you can use the key.

      Activation date (this field is only available for the active key): date when the active key was added.

      License expiration date (this field is only available for the active key): date when the application can no
      longer be used with the current active key.



Viewing information about the license and the key in the
command line
In the command line, using the -L --query command, you can view information about the active and reserve
license keys added to the application, and about the license under which the application has been activated. If a
separate key has been added to the application to activate additional functionality, information about the added
active and reserve license keys for additional functionality is also displayed.




                                                        98
To view information about the license keys and license on the device, run the following command:

  kesl-control -L --query [--json]


  where --json: output data in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are output in the
  INI format.


As a result of the command execution, the following information will be displayed in the console:

   Information about the active main license key, if this key has been added:

      Date and time when the license for using the application expires.

      Number of days before the end of the license term.

      Information about the limitation of protection functions.

      Information about the limitation of the function for updating application databases.

      Information about the status of the license key.

      The type of license associated with the key.

      Licensing limitation of the key (the number of licensing units).

      Name of the application that the key is intended to activate.

      Active license key (unique alphanumeric sequence).

      Activation date.

   Information about the reserve main license key. Displayed if the application is being used in standard mode and
   a reserve key has been added. If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments,
   information about the reserve key is not displayed; the reserve key is added to the SVM.

      Date and time when the license for using the application expires.

      Information about the limitation of protection functions.

      Information about the limitation of the function for updating application databases.

      Information about the status of the license key.

      The type of license associated with the key.

      Licensing limitation of the key (the number of licensing units).

      Name of the application that the key is intended to activate.

      Reserve license key (unique alphanumeric sequence).

      Date and time when the license associated with the active key expires, in UTC.




                                                         99
   Information about the active key for additional functionality if a separate key has been added:

      Expiration date and time of the license that activates additional functionality.

      Number of days before the end of the license term.

      Information about the limitation of the function for updating application databases.

      Information about the status of the license key.

      The type of license associated with the key.

      Licensing limitation of the key (the number of licensing units).

      Name of the application that the key is intended to activate.

      Active license key (unique alphanumeric sequence).

      Activation date.

   Information about the reserve key for additional functionality. Displayed if the application is being used in
   standard mode and a reserve key for additional functionality has been added. If the application is used in Light
   Agent mode to protect virtual environments, information about the reserve key is not displayed; the reserve key
   is added to the SVM.

      Expiration date and time of the license that activates additional functionality.

      Information about the limitation of the function for updating application databases.

      Information about the status of the license key.

      The type of license associated with the key.

      Licensing limitation of the key (the number of licensing units).

      Name of the application that the key is intended to activate.

      Reserve license key (unique alphanumeric sequence).

      Date and time when the license associated with the active key expires, in UTC.

You can also get information about the license under which the application is being used when viewing information
about the operation of the application using the kesl-control --app-info command.




                                                         100
Data provision
This section describes the information that Kaspersky Endpoint Security may store on the device and
automatically send to Kaspersky during its operation.

Kaspersky protects any information thus received in accordance with law and the applicable rules of Kaspersky.
Data is transmitted over encrypted channels.

For more detailed information about the processing, storage, and destruction of information obtained during the
use of the application and transmitted to Kaspersky, please read the End User License Agreement, the KSN
Statement, and refer to the Privacy Policy on the Kaspersky website . The license.<language ID> and ksn_license.
<language ID> files containing the End User License Agreement and Kaspersky Security Network Statement are
included in the application distribution package.




Data provided when using an activation code
If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in standard mode and is activated using an activation code, in order to
verify if the application is being used legally and to obtain statistical information on the distribution and use of the
application, you agree to automatically provide the following information to Kaspersky:

   Type, version, and localization of the installed application

   Versions of installed application updates

   Device ID and application installation ID on the device

   Activation code that was used to activate the application

   ID of the current license

   Application license key creation date and time

   Date and time on the user device

   Application license term expiration date and time

   Type, version, and bit size of the operating system




                                                          101
Data provided when downloading updates from
Kaspersky update servers
If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in standard mode and you use Kaspersky update servers to download
updates, in order to increase efficiency of the update procedure and to obtain statistical information on the
distribution and use of the application, you agree to automatically provide the following information to Kaspersky:

   Application ID derived from the license

   Full version of the application

   Application license ID

   Type of application license used

   Application installation ID (PCID)

   ID of the application update start

   Web address being processed




Data transferred when using the application in Light
Agent mode
If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments as part of Kaspersky
Security for Virtualization Light Agent, the application saves the following information, which may contain personal
and confidential data, and sends it to other solution components during operation of the application.

   For activation, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends the following data to the Protection Server: the validity
   period of the license key status confirmation, the BIOS ID of the protected virtual machine, and information
   about the license that the Light Agent needs to work.

   To update the Light Agent databases, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends the following data to the Protection
   Server: software identifier obtained from the license; full version of the software; software license identifier;
   software installation identifier (PCID); processed web address; type of the license; identifier of the update start.

   To provide protection, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends the Protection Server the information that is
   necessary for scanning objects while scan tasks are running. The transmitted information may include the
   names of files and paths to them in the file system, the checksums of files, web addresses, and the scanned
   objects or their fragments.

   In an infrastructure managed by a VMware vCenter Server and VMware NSX Manager, Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security may send to the Integration Server information about security tags that are assigned to a protected
   virtual machine upon detection of viruses, malware, or activity that is typical of network attacks. The IDs of
   protected virtual machines are also sent.

   To get information that is used when selecting an SVM for connection, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends the
   identifier of the protected virtual machine to the Integration Server and Protection Server.

                                                        102
   When using the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent solution in multitenancy mode, the
   information necessary for generating tenant protection reports may be sent to SVMs from the Kaspersky
   Endpoint Security Protection Server. The following data may be sent: identifier of the protected virtual
   machine; type and version of the guest operating system installed on the protected virtual machine; time
   intervals when Kaspersky Endpoint Security was connected to SVMs.

   To obtain statistics, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends the following information to the Protection Server:
   information about the OS version of the protected virtual machine; localization of Kaspersky Endpoint Security;
   names of active Kaspersky Endpoint Security components; identifier (BIOS ID) of the protected virtual
   machine.

The specified information is transmitted over encrypted data channels (except for the information necessary for
scanning objects, and the information that is used when selecting SVMs). The connection between Kaspersky
Endpoint Security and the Protection Servers is not encrypted by default. You can enable encryption of the data
channel between the Light Agents and the Protection Servers in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security settings.




Data sent to Kaspersky Security Center
During operation, Kaspersky Endpoint Security saves and submits to Kaspersky Security Center the following
information, which may contain personal and confidential data:

   Information about the databases used by the application:

      List of the database categories required by the application

      Date and time when the databases were released and loaded into the application

      Date when the downloaded application database updates were released

      Time of the last application database update

      Number of records in the currently used application databases

   Application license information:

      License serial number and type

      License validity period in days

      Number of devices covered by the license

      Start and end dates of license term

      License key status

      Date and time of the last successful synchronization with activation servers if the application was activated
      using an activation code

      Identifier of the application for which the license is intended

      Functionality available under the license

      Name of the organization for which the license is provided


                                                        103
   Additional information if the application is used under subscription (subscription flag, subscription expiration
   date and the number of days available for renewing the subscription, subscription provider web address,
   current subscription status and the reason for this status), date and time when the application was
   activated on the device

   Expiration date and time of the application license on the device

Information about the application updates:

   List of updates to be installed or removed

   Update release date and the sign of the Critical status

   Name, version, and short description of the update

   Link to the detailed description of the update

   Identifier and text of the End User License Agreement and the Privacy Policy for the application updates

   Identifier and text of Kaspersky Security Network Statement for the application updates

   Indicator showing if the update can be removed

   Versions of the application policy and management plug-in

   Web address for downloading the application management plug-in

   Names, version, and installation dates of the installed application updates

   Error code and description if the update installation or removal completed with an error

   Sign and reason for the device or application restart necessity because of the application update

User agreement or disagreement with the terms and conditions of Kaspersky Security Network Statement, End
User License Agreement and Privacy Policy

List of tags assigned to the device

List of device statuses and reasons they are assigned.

The overall status of the application and the status of all its components; information about policy compliance,
real-time protection status of the device, application stability status, information about the application
stopping.

Date and time of the last device scan; number of scanned objects; number of detected malicious objects;
number of blocked, deleted and disinfected objects; number of objects that cannot be disinfected; number of
scan errors; number of detected network attacks

Data on the currently applied values of the application settings

Current status and execution results of group tasks and local tasks, and settings of the tasks.

Information about external devices connected to the client device (ID, name, type, manufacturer, description,
serial number, VID/PID)



                                                     104
Information about backup copies of files in the Backup storage (name, path, size and type of the object,
description of the object, name of the detected threat, version of the application database which is used to
detect the threat, date and time when the object was moved to the Backup storage), actions on the objects in
the Backup storage (removed, restored), and the files by administrator request.

Information about the operation of each application component and about the execution of each task
represented as events:

   Date and time of event

   Name and type of event

   Event severity level

   Name of the task or the application component running when the event occurred

   Information about the application that triggered the event: application name, path to the file on the disk,
   process identifier, setting values​(if the application launch or settings modification event is triggered)

   User ID

   Name of the initiator (task scheduler, application, Kaspersky Security Center, or a user) whose actions
   triggered the event

   Name and identifier of the user who initiated access to the file

   Object or action processing result (description, type, name, threat level and accuracy, file name and type of
   operation on the device, application decision on the operation)

   Information about the object (object name and type, path to the object on the disk, object version, size,
   information about the performed action, event trigger description, description of the reason for not
   processing and skipping the object)

   Device information (manufacturer name, device name, path, device type, bus type, identifier, VID/PID,
   system device flag, name of the device access rule schedule)

   Information about blocking and unblocking the device; information about blocked connections (name,
   description, device name, protocol, remote address and port, local address and port, packet rules, actions)

   Information about requested web address

   Information about detected objects

   Type, method, and ID of the detection

   Information about the performed action

   Information about the application databases (date when the downloaded database updates are released,
   information on the database usage, database usage errors, information on canceling the installed database
   updates)

   Information about encryption detection (ransomware name; name of the device where encryption was
   detected; information about blocking and unblocking the device)

   Application settings and network settings


                                                    105
   Information about the triggered Application Control rule (name and type) and the result of applying the rule

   Information about containers and container images (names of containers or container images, paths to
   containers or container images, repository URL)

   Information about active and blocked connections (name, description, and type)

   Information about blocking and unblocking access to untrusted devices

   Information about the use of KSN (KSN connection status, KSN infrastructure, identifier of the KSN
   Statement in extended mode, acceptance of the KSN Statement in extended mode, identifier of the KSN
   Statement, acceptance of the KSN Statement)

   Information about certificates (domain name, subject name, issuer name, expiration date, certificate status,
   certificate type, date certificate was added, issue date, serial number, SHA256 thumbprint)

   Information about external systems that are part of corporate software solutions (integration server
   address)

   Information about enabling and disabling network isolation for the device

   Information about working in Light Agent mode: name of the virtual machine template, address of the
   Integration Server

   Name of the device for which network isolation is enabled or disabled

   Scan task statistics: number of scanned objects; number of threats found; number of infected objects;
   number of probably infected objects; number of disinfected objects; number of objects added to Backup;
   number of deleted objects; number of not disinfected objects; number of scan errors; number of password-
   protected objects; number of skipped objects; number of scanned containers and images

   Information about the version of the EDR Optimum component used in the application

   Information about threat development chains: name of the online list of threat development chains, ID of the
   threat development chain

Information about operation of the system integrity scan task (name, type, path) and information about the
system baseline

Information about network activity, packet rules, and network attacks

User role information:

   Name and identifier of the user who initiated changing the user role

   User role

   Name of the user who has been assigned or revoked the role




                                                   106
   Information about executable files of applications detected on the client device (name, path, type, and hash of
   the file; list of categories to which the application belongs; KL category to which the application belongs; trust
   group to which the application belongs; time of the first file launch; name and version of the application; name
   of the application vendor; information about the certificate used to sign the application: serial number,
   thumbprint, issuer, subject, release date, expiration date, and public key).

   Information about the online list of threat development chains: threat development chain ID; creation
   timestamp of the threat development chain; format of the threat development chain (text or archive); body size
   of the threat development chain in bytes.




Data provided when following links in the application
interface
When clicking the links in Kaspersky Endpoint Security interface, you agree to automatically provide the following
information to Kaspersky:

   Full version of the application

   Application locale

   Application ID (PID)

   Link name




Data provided when using Kaspersky Security Network
If you use Kaspersky Security Network in extended mode, you agree to automatically provide Kaspersky with all the
data listed in the Kaspersky Security Network Statement. Additionally, files (or parts of files) that intruders may use
to harm the device and the data stored in its operating system may be sent to Kaspersky for scanning.

The ksn_license.<language ID> file with the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement is included
in the application distribution kit.




Data provided when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint
Detection and Response Optimum

Data transmitted together with IOC Scan task results

Kaspersky Endpoint Security automatically sends data about IOC Scan task results to Kaspersky Security Center.




                                                        107
IOC Scan task result data may contain the following information:

   Network information:

      IP address from the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) table

      MAC address from the Address Resolution Protocol table

      Type and name of DNS record

      IP address of the protected device

      MAC address of the protected device

      IP address and port of the remote connection

      IP address of the local network adapter

      Number of the open port on the local adapter

      Protocol number according to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) standard

   Information about processes:

      Process name

      Process arguments

      Path to the executable file of the process

      Process ID (PID)

      Parent process ID

      Name of the user that started the process

      Date and time when the process was started

   Information about services:

      Service name

      Service description

      Path and name of the service executable file

      Service ID

      Service type (kernel driver, adapter, etc.)

      Service status

      Service starting mode

      Name of the user that started the service

                                                      108
   Information about the file system:

      Volume name

      Volume letter

      Volume type

   Information about the operating system:

      Name and version of the operating system

      Network name of the protected device

      Domain or group to which the device belongs

   Information about web activity:

      Browser name

      Browser version

      Time of the last access to the web resource

      Web address of the HTTP request

      Name of the user that made the HTTP request

      Name of the process that made the HTTP request

      Path to the executable file of the process that made the HTTP request

      ID of the process that made the HTTP request

      HTTP referer (web address of the HTTP request source)

      Web address of the requested resource

      User agent of the processed web request (HTTP User-Agent)

      HTTP request execution time

      Unique ID of the process that made the HTTP request


Data for creating a threat development chain

Data for creating a threat development chain may contain the following information:

   General information about the alert:

      Alert date and time

      Object name


                                                      109
   Scan mode

   Status of the last action related to the alert

   Reason why the alert processing failed

Information about the processed object:

   Process identifier

   Parent process ID

   Process file ID

   Command line of the process

   Name of the user that started the process

   ID of the session in which the process was started

   Type of the session in which the process was started

   Integrity level of the processed object

   Whether the user belongs to privileged groups

   ID of the processed object

   Full name of the processed object

   ID of the protected device

   Full name of the object (local file or web address)

   MD5 and SHA256 checksums of the processed object

   Type of the processed object

   Date when the object was created and last modified

   Size of the processed object

   Attributes of the processed object

   Information about the organization that signed the object

   Verification result of the digital certificate of the object

   security identifier (SID) of the object

   Time zone ID of the object

   Web address from which the object was downloaded (for files only)

   Name of the application that downloaded the file

                                                       110
      MD5 and SHA256 checksums of the application that downloaded the file

      Name of the application that last modified the file

      MD5 and SHA256 checksums of the application that last modified the file

      Number of times the processed object was started

      Date and time of the first start of the processed object

      Unique ID of the file

      Full name of the file (local file or web address)

      Web address of the processed web request

      source of the processed web request's links (HTTP referer)

      User agent of the processed web request

      Type of the processed web request (GET or POST)

      Local IP port of the processed web request

      Remote IP port of the processed web request

      Connection direction (inbound or outbound) of the processed web request

      ID of the process into which the malicious code was injected




Data provided when integrating with the Kaspersky
Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component
When integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), a
component of the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, Kaspersky Endpoint Security stores the
following information, which may contain personal and confidential data:

   Addresses of Central Node servers that provide interaction with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
   (KATA) (hereinafter also referred to as KATA servers).

   Public key of the certificate of the server for integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
   (KATA)

   Client certificate for integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)

   Credentials for authenticating on the proxy server

   Settings for the frequency of synchronization with the KATA server and settings for sending data to the KATA
   server

   Status of the connection with the KATA server and information about client certificate and server certificate
   errors

                                                          111
   Settings of tasks received from KATA servers:

      Task start schedule settings

      Names and passwords of accounts that must be used to start tasks

      Versions of settings

      Type of service start

      Names of services

      Command line (including arguments) used to start the process

      MD5 and SHA256 hashes of objects

      Paths to objects

      IOC files

   Isolation settings in accordance with which a device is blocked from connecting to other devices except those
   specified in the exclusions

When integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA),
Kaspersky Endpoint Security stores the following information and may send it to the KATA server:

   Information for synchronization requests to the EDR (KATA) component:

      Unique identifier

      Base part of the server address

      Device name

      IP address of the device

      MAC address of the device

      Local time on the device

      Name and version of the operating system installed on the device

      Version of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

      Release date of the application databases being used

      License key status

   Information from requests to the EDR (KATA) component in task execution reports:

      IP address of the device

      Unique identifier

      Base part of the server address

                                                      112
MAC address of the device

Task execution errors and return codes

Task completion statuses

Task completion time

Versions of task settings used

Information about processes started or stopped on the device at the server's request: PID and UniquePID,
error code, MD5 and SHA256 checksums of objects

Files requested by the server

Information about errors while getting information about objects: full name of the object that was
processed with an error; error code

Network isolation status

For IOCs, scan results are returned (whether each indicator was detected, objects found, and information
about which branch of the indicator was detected).

For objects in which IOCs were detected, different values are returned depending on the type of indicator:

   ArpEntry: IP address from the ARP table (including ipv6), physical address from the ARP table.

   File: MD5 hash of the file, SHA256 hash of the file, full file name (including path), file size.

   Port: remote IP address and port used to established a connection during scan; IP address and port of
   the local adapter; protocol type (TCP, UDP, IP, RAWIP).

   Process: process name; process arguments; path to the process file; system PID of the process; system
   PID of the parent process; name of the user that started the process; date and time the process started.

   SystemInfo: OS name; OS version; network name of the device without a domain; domain or workgroup.

   User: user name.

For quarantined objects:

   File path

   File size

   File ID that was assigned when quarantining

   Original file deletion flag

For files obtained from Quarantine:

   File ID that was assigned when quarantining




                                                    113
   For prevented executions of executable files or scripts:

      Process ID

      Parent process ID

      System ID

      Logon session ID

      Process status

      Date and time of execution interception

   For prohibited document openings by office applications:

      Process ID.

      File ID

      Date and time of execution interception

Data in telemetry packets:

   Information about files:

      Unique ID of the file

      File path

      File name

      File size

      File attributes

      Creation date and time of the file

      Last modification date and time of the file

      MD5 and SHA256 hashes of the object

      Information (name and ID) about the user and group that own the file

   Information about running processes:

      Process file ID

      Process ID.

      Command line options that the process was started with

      Session ID



                                                    114
   Date and time when the process was started

   Information (name and ID) about the user and group that started the process

Information about the process gaining access to the memory of another process:

   Process ID.

   Method and address of injection.

   Command line (including arguments) used to modify the process.

   System call arguments of the process.

Information about detected and processed threats:

   Name of the detected threat and the technology that detected the threat, according to the Kaspersky
   classification

   Application database version

   Web address from which the infected object was downloaded

   Threat processing status

   The reason why the threat cannot be eliminated

   Unique ID of the threat file

File modification data:

   Unique ID of the modified file

   Unique ID of the process that made the changes

   Information about the modification

Data about changes in the system:

   Unique ID of the process that made the changes

   Information about the change that occurred

User logon information:

   Session ID

   User information (name and ID)

   IP address of the device from which the session was established

Data about processes being terminated: unique ID of the process

Information about loading a library into the address space of the process: the ID of the loaded library


                                                 115
      Information about an established network connection:

         Local IP address

         Remote IP address

         Direction of the connection

         Protocol

      Information about the process that is listening for external network connections on a certain port:

         Local address (port and IP address)

         Protocol

      DNS server query information:

         Domain name of the queried resource

         IP address of the queried resource

         DNS server IP address

         Query type


  The information listed here can also be saved in trace files and dump files.




Data provided when integrating with the Kaspersky
Network Detection and Response (KATA) component
When integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA), a
component of the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, Kaspersky Endpoint Security stores the
following information, which may contain personal and confidential data:

   NDR server addresses

   Public key of the server certificate for integration with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA)

   Client certificate for integration with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA)

   Credentials for authenticating on the proxy server

   Settings for the frequency of synchronization with the NDR server, and settings for transferring data to the
   NDR server

   NDR server connection status and information about errors related to the client certificate and server
   certificate




                                                        116
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with the Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA)
component, the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application stores and sends the following data to the NDR server:

   Data from synchronization requests to the NDR server:

      Unique identifier

      Base part of the server address

      Device name

      IP address of the device

      MAC address of the device

      Local time on the device

      Name, family and version of the operating system installed on the device

      Version of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

      Release date of the application databases being used

      License key status

      Model and manufacturer of the user's device

   Data in telemetry packets:

      Information about the device and users:

         Device name and time on the device

         Family, name, and version of the operating system

         Information about network interfaces (description, list of IP addresses with subnet mask, MAC address,
         metric number, DNS domain name, routing information, listening port numbers)

         Device internal unique ID

         User names and IDs

         User group names and IDs

      Information about the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application:

         Name and version of the application

         Date of the last application update

         Information about license keys (serial number, type, license validity period, key status)

         Application database version

         List of supported API versions

                                                        117
    Information about established connections:

       Local IP address, port and MAC address

       Remote IP address, port and MAC address

       Gateway IP address

       Protocol type (according to IANA), protocol number and EtherType

       Number of received and sent packages

    Information about processed files:

       File name and unique ID

       File type and size

       Full path to the file image

       File system attribute mask

       The time when the file was created and modified

       Checksums (MD5 and SHA256)

       File privileges, including inherited and effective

    Information about running and terminating processes:

       Process UID and PID

       Process type

       Session ID

       Executed command

       Environment variables

    Information about detected and processed threats:

       Name of the detected threat and the technology that detected the threat, according to the Kaspersky
       classification

       Application database version

       Web address from which the infected object was downloaded

       Threat processing status

       The reason why the threat cannot be eliminated


The information listed here can also be saved in trace files and dump files.

                                                       118
Data provided when integrating with Kaspersky Unified
Monitoring and Analysis Platform
When integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform, Kaspersky
Endpoint Security stores the following information, which may contain personal and confidential data:

   KUMA server addresses

   Public key of the server certificate for integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform
   (except when the UDP protocol is used to connect to the KUMA server)

   Client certificate for integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform

   Credentials for authenticating on the proxy server

   Settings for the frequency of synchronization with the KUMA server, and settings for transferring data to the
   KUMA server

   KUMA server connection status and information about errors related to the client certificate and server
   certificate

When integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform, the
Kaspersky Endpoint Security application saves and transmits the following data to the KUMA server in telemetry
packets:

   Information about file modifications:

      Unique ID of the file before the modification

      Unique ID of the modified file

      Unique ID of the process that made the changes

      Type and flag of the file operation

      Date and time the file was modified

   Information about running and terminating processes:

      Process file ID

      Process UID and PID

      Command line options that the process was started with

      Session ID

      Date and time when the process was started

      Information (name and ID) about the user and group that started the process


                                                        119
Information about events in the event log:

   Date and time of event

   UID of the process associated with the event

   Type and description of the event

   Result of performing the operation




                                                  120
Application management concept
To manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, you can use:

   Kaspersky Security Center

   The command line

   The graphical interface of the application


     If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, it is not
     possible to manage the application using Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console and the graphical
     interface of the application.


The set of actions that you can perform using the Kaspersky Endpoint Security graphical interface is limited.

This section describes the specifics of managing the application via Kaspersky Security Center and the command
line, and also describes the main methods of working in the Kaspersky Security Center administration consoles and
in the command line.




Managing the application using Kaspersky Security
Center
Kaspersky Security Center allows you to remotely and centrally manage the operation of Kaspersky Endpoint
Security on client devices. You can remotely install and uninstall, start, and stop Kaspersky Endpoint Security;
configure settings for the application, as well as for the individual components and tasks of the application; and
start and stop tasks on the managed devices.

You can use the following Kaspersky Security Center administration consoles to manage Kaspersky Endpoint
Security via Kaspersky Security Center:

   Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console (hereinafter also referred to as Administration Console).
   This is a Microsoft Management Console (MMC) snap-in that is installed on the administrator's workstation and
   provides a user interface for the Administration Server and Network Agent administrative services.
   The interface for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security via the Kaspersky Security Center Administration
   Console is provided by an MMC-based management plug-in (hereinafter also referred to as the "MMC plug-in").


     This Help describes how to manage the Administration Console of Kaspersky Security Center 14.2
     Windows.


   Kaspersky Security Center Web Console (hereinafter also referred to as Web Console). This is a web interface
   for managing a protection system based on Kaspersky applications. You can work in Kaspersky Security Center
   Web Console using a browser on any device that has access to the Administration Server.
   The interface for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security via the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console is
   provided by a management web plug-in (hereinafter also simply referred to as web plug-in).



                                                        121
     This Help describes how to manage the Web Console of Kaspersky Security Center 15.1 Linux.


   Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console. This is a cloud-based administration console within the cloud
   version of the Kaspersky Security Center application, also known as the Kaspersky Security Center Cloud
   Console . Interface of the Cloud console is similar to Kaspersky Security Center Web Console interface. The
   interface for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security via the Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console is also
   provided by the web plug-in.


     The Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console does not support managing the settings for integrating
     Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA).



     It is not possible to manage the application using the Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console if
     Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments.


The MMC plug-in and web plug-in allow you to create policies and tasks in Kaspersky Security Center for managing
the operation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   A policy is a set of settings that is applied on all devices in an administration group . Policies allow you to apply
   identical application settings to all client devices within an administration group.
   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security policy defines the general settings for the operation of Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security and the settings for the operation of individual functional components of the application on devices
   where the policy is applied.

   Tasks for Kaspersky Endpoint Security created in Kaspersky Security Center run on the protected devices and
   implement Kaspersky Endpoint Security functions such as on-demand scan, application activation, and
   updates to the databases and modules of the application.
   In Kaspersky Security Center, you can create tasks to be performed on an individual device (local tasks), tasks
   for all devices in the administration group (group tasks), or tasks for a random selection of devices (tasks for
   sets of devices).

Regardless of the Kaspersky Security Center administration console that you use, you must assign the devices on
which Kaspersky Endpoint Security is installed to administration groups in order to manage Kaspersky Endpoint
Security on these devices using Kaspersky Security Center. You can create administration groups in Kaspersky
Security Center before Kaspersky Endpoint Security installation and configure rules to automatically move the
devices to administration groups. You can also manually move the devices to the administration groups after
installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security (for details, refer to Kaspersky Security Center documentation).



Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-ins
The following administration plug-ins are required for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security using Kaspersky
Security Center:

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in (hereinafter also referred to as web plug-in) facilitates
   interaction between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Security Center using Kaspersky Security
   Center Web Console and Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console.
   The web plug-in must be installed on the device that has Kaspersky Security Center Web Console installed.
   Management of Kaspersky Endpoint Security using the web plug-in is available to all administrators who have
   access to the Kaspersky Security Center Web Console in a browser.


                                                         122
   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration MMC plug-in (hereinafter also referred to as the MMC plug-in)
   facilitates interaction between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Security Center using the
   Administration Console.
   The MMC plug-in must be installed on the device where the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console
   is installed.

The Kaspersky Endpoint Security management plug-ins allow you to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security using
policies and tasks.

For more details about management plug-ins, refer to Kaspersky Security Center documentation.



Kaspersky Security Center policies
A policy is a set of Kaspersky Endpoint Security settings that are applied to all client devices included in the
administration group .

Multiple policies with different values of the settings can be configured for a single application. However, there can
be only one active policy at a time for an application within an administration group. When you create a new policy,
all other policies within an administration group become inactive. You can change the policy status later.

Policies have a hierarchy, similarly to administration groups. By default, a child policy inherits the settings from the
parent policy. A child policy is a policy of a nested hierarchy level, that is, a policy for nested administration groups
and secondary Administration Servers. You can enable inheritance of the settings from the parent policy.

You can locally modify the values of the settings specified by the policy for individual devices within the
administration group, if modification of these settings is not prohibited by the policy.

Each policy setting has a "lock" attribute that indicates whether child policy settings and local application settings
can be modified. The "lock" status of a setting within policy properties determines whether or not an application
setting on a client device can be edited:

   When a setting is "locked" ( ), you cannot edit its value locally or in the policies of the nested hierarchy level.
   The setting value specified by the policy is used for all client devices within the administration group and nested
   groups.

   When a setting is "unlocked" ( ), you can edit its value locally or in the policies of the nested hierarchy level. If
   setting values are specified locally or in policy properties of a nested hierarchy level for client devices within an
   administration group, the setting value specified in the policy properties is not applied.

In the web plug-in and in the MMC plug-in, the number of parameters with "locks" is different. The web plug-in
includes "locks" that are not present in the MMC plug-in.

A policy profile may contain settings that differ from the "base" policy settings and apply to client devices when
the configured conditions (activation rules) are met. Using policy profiles allows you to flexibly configure application
settings for different devices. You can create and configure profiles in the Policy profiles section of the policy
properties.

Profile settings that are locked with a "padlock" override policy settings. That is, if the profile setting locked with a
"padlock" is different from the policy setting, the application applies the setting from the profile. However, lists of
settings are merged, supplementing each other. That is, if the settings in the list from the profile are missing from
the "basic" policy, they are added to the resulting list of settings.




                                                          123
Some lists are not merged, in which case the settings from the profile override the settings of the "basic" policy:

   Exclusions by process in the File Threat Protection and Behavior Detection components

   Protection scopes in the File Threat Protection and Anti-Cryptor components

   Monitoring scopes in the System Integrity Monitoring component

   List of rules (in the Application Control rules window) in the Application Control component

   List of rules in Web Control

   Process memory exclusions in application settings

   Trusted domains in network settings

   Trusted root certificates in network settings

   Monitored ports in network settings

   List of SVM addresses in SVM discovery settings

After the policy is applied for the first time, the application settings change in accordance with the policy settings.


  If the application is not running when the policy is deleted, after application is started, this policy continues to
  be applied on the device and the application continues to operate with the settings specified by this policy.


For more details about policies and policy profiles, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.



Tasks for Kaspersky Endpoint Security created in Kaspersky
Security Center
You can create the following types of tasks in Kaspersky Security Center for Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   local tasks to run on individual devices;

   group tasks to run on devices within an administration group;

   tasks for sets of devices to run on multiple devices, regardless of their inclusion in administration groups.


     The tasks for the sets of devices are performed only on the devices that are specified in the task settings.
     If new devices are added to the device selection for which the task is created, this task is not applied to
     the new devices. To apply the task to these computers, you must create a new task or edit the settings
     of the existing task.


You can create any number of group tasks, tasks for a sets of devices, or local tasks.


  The tasks are executed only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running on the devices.


                                                         124
General information about tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center is provided in Kaspersky Security Center
documentation.

The following tasks are provided for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Kaspersky Security Center:

   Malware Scan. During the task execution, the application scans the device areas that are specified in the task
   settings for viruses and other malware.

   Critical Areas Scan. During the task execution, the application scans boot sectors, startup objects, process
   memory, and kernel memory.

   Container Scan. During the task execution, the application scans containers and images for viruses and other
   malware.

   Inventory. During the task execution, the application receives information about all executable files stored on
   the devices.

   System Integrity Check. During the task execution, the application determines changes of each object by
   comparing the current state of the monitored object to its original state, which was previously established as a
   baseline.

   Add Key. During the task execution, the application adds a key, including a reserve one, to activate the
   application.

   Update. During the task execution, the application updates the databases in accordance with the configured
   update settings.

   Rollback. During the task execution, the application rolls back the last database update.


  The set of policy settings and default values for task settings depend on the license type. The Add Key,
  Update, and Rollback tasks are not applicable if the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual
  environments.




Logging in and out of the Web Console and Cloud Console

Kaspersky Security Center Web Console

To log in to the Web Console, you need to know the web address and the port number of the Administration
Server specified during the Web Console installation (port 8080 is used by default). JavaScript must also be
enabled in your browser.

To log in to Web Console:

 1. In your browser, go to the < Administration Server web address >:< port number > address.
   The login page is displayed.

 2. Enter the user name and password for your account.


     It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms ensure
     that the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.

                                                        125
 3. Click Log in.
   If the Administration Server is not responding, or if you enter incorrect credentials, an error message is
   displayed.

After logging in, a dashboard is displayed with the last language and theme used.

For more details about the Web Console interface, refer to Kaspersky Security Center documentation.

To log out of Web Console:

  select <Account name> → Exit in the lower left corner of the screen.


The Web Console is closed, and the login page is displayed.


Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console

For the Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console, use a web token to log in to your account on the Cloud
Console portal.

For detailed information about Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center
Cloud Console documentation .



Managing policies in the Web Console
You can perform the following actions with the policies in the Web Console:

   Create a policy.

   Edit policy settings.


      If the user account which is used to access the Administration Server does not have permissions to edit
      the settings of certain functional scopes, the settings of these functional scopes are not available for
      editing.


   Export and import policy settings.

   Copy and move a policy.

   Delete a policy.

   Change a policy status.

   Create policy profiles.

For general information about working with policies, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help.




                                                        126
Creating a policy in the Web Console
To create a policy in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Policies and policy profiles.
   A list of policies and policy profiles opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the devices to which the policy should be applied. To do so, click the
    link in the Current path field located above the list of policies and policy profiles, and select the administration
    group in the window that opens.

 3. Click Add.
   The Policy Wizard starts.

 4. In the displayed window, select Kaspersky Endpoint Security from the list.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 5. Specify the Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage mode:

      Standard mode to protect workstations and servers – the application is used to protect devices running
      Linux operating systems.

      Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments – as part of the Kaspersky Security for
      Virtualization Light Agent solution, the application is used to protect virtual machines running Linux guest
      operating systems.

 6. If you are using the application in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, configure the SVM
    discovery settings:

    a. Select the method that Light Agents use to discover SVMs available for connection.

          Use the Integration Server


            If this option is selected, Light Agent connects to Integration Server to get a list of SVMs available
            for connection and their details.


          Use a custom list of SVM addresses


            If this option is selected, you can specify a list of SVMs that Light Agents managed by this policy
            can connect to. Light agents will only connect to SVMs specified in the list.



         If you select the Use a custom list of SVM addresses option, the Light Agent is using the extended
         SVM selection algorithm, and large infrastructure protection mode is enabled on an SVM (for more
         information, see the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help ), then connecting a Light
         Agent to this SVM is only possible if the SVM path is ignored. In the SVM selection algorithm section,
         you need to set the SVM path setting to Ignore. If any other value is set, Light Agents will not be able
         to connect to the SVM.




                                                         127
 b. If you select Integration Server, the wizard displays the current settings for connecting Light Agents to the
    Integration Server: address and port for connecting. If necessary, specify new connection settings:

    a. Click the Configure button and specify new connection settings in the window that opens:

         Address


            IP address in IPv4 format or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the device on which the
            Integration Server is installed.


              If a NetBIOS name, "localhost", or 127.0.0.1 is specified as the address, the connection to the
              Integration Server fails with an error.



         Port


            Port for connecting to the Integration Server.
            Port 7271 is used by default.


    b. Click the Check button.

    c. The web plug-in checks the SSL certificate received from the Integration Server. If the certificate
       contains an error or is not trusted, a corresponding message is displayed in the Connection to the
       Integration Server window.
      You can view information about the certificate received from the Integration Server by clicking on the
      View the received certificate line. If you encounter problems with an SSL certificate, we recommend to
      make sure that the data transmission channel you are using is secure.
      To save the received certificate and continue connecting to the Integration Server, in the Select an
      action block, select the Ignore option.

    d. Specify the password of the Integration Server administrator (password of the admin account) and click
       the Test button.
      The New Policy Wizard connects to the Integration Server. If the connection fails, an error message
      appears in the window. If the connection succeeds, the Connection to the Integration Server window
      closes, and the Connection to the Integration Server field of the New Policy Wizard window shows the
      Connected status.

 c. If you select a manually defined list of SVM addresses, the window displays a list of SVMs that Light Agents
    managed by this policy can connect to. To add an SVM to the list, click the Add button and, in the window
    that opens, specify the IP address in IPv4 format or the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the SVM. You
    can enter multiple IP addresses or FQDNs of SVMs on a new line.


     Specify only fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) that map to a single IP address. Using a fully qualified
     domain name that corresponds to multiple IP addresses can lead to errors in the application.


   You can delete addresses selected in the list by clicking the Delete button.

Proceed to the next step of the wizard.




                                                    128
 7. Decide whether you want to use Kaspersky Security Network. Carefully read the Kaspersky Security Network
    Statement and do one of the following:

      If you agree with all the terms and conditions of the Statement and want the application to use Kaspersky
      Security Network, select I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and accept the terms and
      conditions of Kaspersky Security Network Statement.

      If you do not want to use Kaspersky Security Network, select I do not accept the terms and conditions of
      the Kaspersky Security Network Statement and confirm your decision in the window that opens.

   Refusal to use Kaspersky Security Network does not interrupt the policy creation process. At any time, you can
   enable or disable use of Kaspersky Security Network or change the KSN mode for managed devices in the
   policy settings.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 8. The General tab of the new policy settings window opens. Specify a name for the new policy.
   You can also configure the following policy settings:

      Policy status:

          Active. The policy that is currently applied to the device. If this option is selected, this policy becomes
          active on the device upon the next device synchronization with the Administration Server. This option is
          selected by default.

          Inactive. The policy that is not currently applied to the device. If this option is selected, the policy
          becomes inactive but remains in the Policies folder. You can activate the inactive policy later.

      Policy settings inheritance:

          Inherit settings from parent policy. If this option is enabled, the policy settings values are inherited from
          the upper-level group policy and, therefore, are locked. This toggle switch is enabled by default.

          Enforce settings inheritance for child policies If this option is enabled, the settings values of the child
          policies are locked. This toggle switch is disabled by default.

   For general information about the policy settings, refer to Kaspersky Security Center Help section.

 9. If you want to configure other policy settings, go to the Application settings tab and make the necessary
    changes.
   You can also change the policy settings later.

10. Click Save.

  The created policy will be displayed in the list of policies.


For general information about managing policies, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help .



Changing policy settings in the Web Console
To edit policy settings in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Policies and policy profiles.
   The list of policies opens.
                                                           129
 2. Select the administration group containing the devices to which the policy is applied. To do so, click the link in
    the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the administration group in the window that
    opens.
    The list displays the policies configured for the selected administration group.

 3. Click the name of the required policy in the list.
    The policy properties window opens.

 4. Modify the policy settings on the Application settings tab.

 5. Click the Save button to save the changes made.

  The policy is saved with the updated settings.



Policy settings in the Web Console

   The default set of settings and values for the policy settings depend on the license that was used to activate
   the application. Some policy settings are applied or not applied to the application depending on the
   application mode.


You can configure policy settings on the Application settings tab of the policy properties window.

Policy settings

              Section                             Subsections

   Essential Threat Protection   File Threat Protection
                                 File Threat Protection exclusions
                                 Firewall Management
                                 Web Threat Protection
                                 Network Threat Protection

   Advanced Threat Protection    Kaspersky Security Network
                                 Anti-Cryptor
                                 Behavior Detection

   Detection and Response        Managed Detection and Response
                                 Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
                                 Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
                                 Network Detection and Response (KATA)
                                 Sandbox

   Security Controls             Application Control
                                 Device Control
                                 System Integrity Monitoring
                                 Web Control

   Local Tasks                   Task management
                                 Removable Drives Scan

   General settings              Proxy server settings
                                 Application settings
                                 Container Scan settings
                                 Network settings
                                 Global exclusions
                                 Storage settings

   KUMA Integration              KUMA Integration

                                                                     130
           Section                          Subsections

  Light Agent mode           SVM discovery settings
                             Integration Server connection settings
                             SVM connection tag
                             SVM selection algorithm
                             Protecting the connection




Managing policies in the Administration Console
You can perform the following actions with the policies in the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console:

   Create a policy.

   Edit policy settings. You can manage policy settings in the policy properties window.


     If the user account which is used to access the Administration Server does not have permissions to edit
     the settings of certain functional scopes, the settings of these functional scopes are not available for
     editing.


   Export and import policy settings.

   Delete a policy.

   Change a policy status.

   Create policy profiles.

For general information about working with policies, please refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help .




Creating a policy using the Administration Console
To create a policy in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the administration group containing
    the devices to which the policy should be applied.
   You can view the list of devices that are part of an administration group on the Devices tab of the folder with
   the name of this administration group.

 2. In the workspace, select the Policies tab.

 3. Click the New policy button to start the New policy wizard.
   You can also start the Wizard by clicking the Create → Policy item in the context menu in the list of policies.

 4. At the first step of the wizard, in the list, select Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 5. Enter a name for the new policy.

                                                              131
6. To use the settings from the previous version of Kaspersky Endpoint Security policy in the policy being created,
   select the Use policy settings for the earlier application version check box.
  Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

7. Decide whether you want to use Kaspersky Security Network. Carefully read the Kaspersky Security Network
   Statement and do one of the following:

     If you agree with all the terms and conditions of the Statement and want the application to use Kaspersky
     Security Network, select I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and accept the terms and
     conditions of Kaspersky Security Network Statement.

     If you do not want to use Kaspersky Security Network, select I do not accept the terms and conditions of
     the Kaspersky Security Network Statement and confirm your decision in the window that opens.

  Refusal to use Kaspersky Security Network does not interrupt the policy creation process. At any time, you can
  enable or disable use of Kaspersky Security Network or change the KSN mode for managed devices in the
  policy settings.
  Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

8. Specify the Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage mode:

     Standard mode to protect workstations and servers – the application is used to protect devices running
     Linux operating systems.

     Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments – as part of the Kaspersky Security for
     Virtualization Light Agent solution, the application is used to protect virtual machines running Linux guest
     operating systems.

  Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

9. If you are using the application in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, configure the SVM
   discovery settings:

   a. Select the method that Light Agents use to discover SVMs available for connection.

        Use the Integration Server


           If this option is selected, Light Agent connects to Integration Server to get a list of SVMs available
           for connection and their details.


        Use a custom list of SVM addresses


           If this option is selected, you can specify a list of SVMs that Light Agents managed by this policy
           can connect to. Light agents will only connect to SVMs specified in the list.



       If you select the Use a custom list of SVM addresses option, the Light Agent is using the extended
       SVM selection algorithm, and large infrastructure protection mode is enabled on an SVM (for more
       information, see the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help ), then connecting a Light
       Agent to this SVM is only possible if the SVM path is ignored. In the SVM selection algorithm section,
       you need to set the SVM path setting to Ignore. If any other value is set, Light Agents will not be able
       to connect to the SVM.



                                                       132
b. If you select Integration Server, the wizard displays the current settings for connecting Light Agents to the
   Integration Server: address and port for connecting. If necessary, specify new connection settings:

   a. Click the Edit button and specify new connection settings in the window that opens:

        Address


           IP address in IPv4 format or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the device on which the
           Integration Server is installed.
           If the device on which Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed is part of a
           domain, the field indicates the domain name of this device by default.
           If the device on which the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed is not
           part of a domain or the Integration Server is installed on another device, the field must be filled in
           manually.


             If a NetBIOS name, "localhost", or 127.0.0.1 is specified as the address, the connection to the
             Integration Server fails with an error.



        Port


           Port for connecting to the Integration Server.
           Port 7271 is used by default.


   b. Click OK.

   c. If the device hosting the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console does not belong to a
      domain or your account does not belong to the KLAdmins local or domain group or to the local
      administrator group, the Integration Server administrator account is used for authentication on the
      Integration Server.
     In the window that opens, enter the password of the Integration Server administrator (password of the
     admin account) and click the OK button.

   d. The MMC plug-in checks the SSL certificate received from the Integration Server. If the certificate
      contains an error or is not trusted, the Verify Integration Server certificate window opens. You can click
      the link in the window to view the details of the received certificate.


       If you encounter problems with an SSL certificate, we recommend to make sure that the data
       transmission channel you are using is secure.


     To continue connecting to the Integration Server, click the Ignore button. The received certificate will be
     installed as a trusted certificate on the device where the Kaspersky Security Center Administration
     Console is installed.

c. If you select a manually defined list of SVM addresses, the window displays a list of SVMs that Light Agents
   managed by this policy can connect to. To add an SVM to the list, click the Add button and, in the window
   that opens, specify the IP address in IPv4 format or the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the SVM. You
   can enter multiple IP addresses or FQDNs of SVMs on a new line.




                                                    133
         Specify only fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) that map to a single IP address. Using a fully qualified
         domain name that corresponds to multiple IP addresses can lead to errors in the application.


       You can delete addresses selected in the list by clicking the Delete button.

   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

10. If necessary, configure the general settings for File Threat Protection.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 11. If necessary, edit the File Threat Protection settings that have been configured by default.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

12. If necessary, configure the exclusions from File Threat Protection.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

13. If necessary, modify the default actions for infected objects.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

14. Complete the New Policy Wizard.

The created policy is displayed in the list of policies of the administration group on the Policies tab and in the
Policies folder of the console tree.

You can change the policy settings later. For general information about managing policies, refer to the Kaspersky
Security Center Help.



Changing policy settings in the Kaspersky Security Center Administration
Console
To edit policy settings in the Administration Console:

 1. In the tree of the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console, in the Managed devices folder, open the
    folder with the name of the administration group that includes the required devices.

 2. In the workspace, select the Policies tab.

 3. In the list of policies, select the required policy and double-click it to open the Properties: <Policy name>
    window.
   You can also open the policy properties window by using the Properties item in the policy context menu or by
   clicking the Configure policy settings link located to the right of the list of policies in the section with the
   policy settings.

 4. Edit the policy settings.

 5. In the Properties: <Policy name> window, click OK to save the changes.




                                                         134
Policy settings in the Administration Console

   The default set of settings and values for the policy settings depend on the license that was used to activate
   the application. Some policy settings are applied or not applied to the application depending on the
   application mode.


You can configure policy settings in the sections and subsections of the policy properties window. For information
about configuring general policy settings and event settings, refer to Kaspersky Security Center Help section.

Policy settings

              Section                           Subsections

   Essential Threat Protection   File Threat Protection
                                 File Threat Protection exclusions
                                 Firewall Management
                                 Web Threat Protection
                                 Network Threat Protection

   Advanced Threat Protection    Kaspersky Security Network
                                 Anti-Cryptor
                                 Behavior Detection

   Detection and Response        Managed Detection and Response
                                 Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
                                 Network Detection and Response (KATA)

   Security Controls             Application Control
                                 Device Control
                                 System Integrity Monitoring
                                 Web Control

   Local Tasks                   Task management
                                 Removable Drives Scan

   General settings              Proxy server settings
                                 Application settings
                                 Container Scan settings
                                 Network settings
                                 Global exclusions
                                 Excluding process memory
                                 Storage settings

   KUMA Integration              KUMA Integration

   Light Agent mode              Connection to the Integration Server
                                 SVM discovery settings
                                 SVM connection tag
                                 SVM selection algorithm
                                 Protecting the connection




                                                                     135
Managing tasks in the Web Console
You can perform the following actions with the tasks for Kaspersky Endpoint Security in the Web Console:

   Create new tasks.

   Edit task settings.


     If the user account which is used to access the Administration Server does not have permissions to edit
     the settings of certain functional scopes, the settings of these functional scopes are not available for
     editing.


   Start, stop, pause, and resume tasks.


     The Update task cannot be paused or resumed, it can only be started or stopped.


   Export and import tasks.

   Delete tasks.

In the list of tasks, you can monitor the task execution results: view the task status and the statistics for task
performance on the devices. You can also create a selection of events to monitor the task execution (Monitoring
and reports → Event selections). For details on event selection, refer to Kaspersky Security Center
documentation.

Task execution results are also saved locally on the device and in Kaspersky Security Center reports.

For general information about task management, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system .


  If the device is managed by a policy, it may not be possible to view and manage tasks created in Kaspersky
  Security Center using the command line or the graphical interface of the application.




Creating tasks in the Web Console
To create a task for a group or set of devices in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Tasks.
   The list of tasks opens.

 2. Click Add.
   The Task Wizard starts.




                                                       136
 3. In the first step of the Wizard, perform the following actions:

    a. In the Application drop-down list, select the application name: Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

    b. In the Task type drop-down list, select the type of task that you want to create.

    c. In the Task name field, enter a name for the new task.

    d. In the Devices to which the task will be assigned section, select the method for defining the task scope.
       The task scope comprises the devices on which the task will be run:

          Select the Assign task to an administration group option if the task is to be run on all devices included
          in a specific administration group.

          Select the Specify device addresses manually, or import addresses from a list option if the task is to
          be run on the specified devices.

          Select the Assign task to a device selection option if the task is to be run on devices included in the
          device selection according to a predefined criterion. For information on how to create a device selection,
          refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 4. Depending on the selected method for defining the task scope, perform one of the following actions:

      In the administration group tree, select the check boxes next to the required administration groups.

      In the list of devices, select the check boxes next to the required devices. If the required devices are not
      listed, you can add them in the following ways:

          Using the Add devices button. You can add devices by name or IP address, add devices from a specified
          IP range, or select devices from the list of devices detected by the Administration Server when polling
          the corporate LAN.

          Using the Import devices from file button. For the import, a TXT file with a list of device addresses is
          used, where each address must be on a separate line.

      From the list, select the name of the selection containing the required devices.

   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 5. To configure the task settings immediately after creation, in the last step of the Wizard, select the Open task
    properties window after creation check box. A task is created with the default settings.

 6. Complete the wizard.

  A new task will be displayed in the list of tasks.


To create a local task in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.




                                                         137
 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. In the list, find the device for which you want to create a task and click the device name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Tasks tab.
   The list of tasks created for this device is displayed.

 5. Click Add.
   The Task Wizard starts.

 6. In the first step of the Wizard, perform the following actions:

    a. In the Application drop-down list, select the application name: Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

    b. In the Task type drop-down list, select the type of task that you want to create.

    c. In the Task name field, enter a name for the new task.

 7. To configure the task settings immediately after creation, in the last step of the Wizard, select the Open task
    properties window after creation check box. A task is created with the default settings.

 8. Complete the wizard.

  A new task will be displayed in the list of tasks.



Changing task settings in the Web Console
To edit task settings in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Tasks.
   The list of tasks opens.

 2. Do one of the following:

      To edit the settings of a task that is run on all devices included in a specific administration group, click the
      link in the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the administration group in the
      window that opens.
      The list displays only tasks configured for the selected administration group.

      To edit the settings of a task that is run on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices), click the link
      in the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the top node with the name of the
      Administration Server in the window that opens.
      The list displays all tasks created on the Administration Server.

 3. In the list of tasks, select the required task and open the task properties window by clicking the link in the task
    name.




                                                             138
 4. Configure the task settings:

      On the General tab, you can edit the name of the task.

      On the Application settings tab, you can configure specific task settings. The availability of configurable
      settings depends on the type of task.

      On the Schedule tab, you can configure the task run schedule and additional settings for starting and
      stopping the task.

   The General, Results, Settings, Schedule, and Revision history tabs of the task properties window are
   standard for Kaspersky Security Center; for more details, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

 5. Click the Save button to save the changes made.



Starting, stopping, pausing, and resuming tasks in the Web Console
To start, stop, pause, or resume a task in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of Kaspersky Security Center Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Tasks.
   The list of tasks opens.

 2. Do one of the following:

      To start or stop a task that is run on all devices included in a specific administration group, click the link in the
      Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the administration group in the window that
      opens.
      The list displays only the tasks created for the selected administration group.

      To start or stop a task that is run on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices), click the link in the
      Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the top node with the name of the
      Administration Server in the window that opens.
      The list displays all tasks created on the Administration Server.

 3. In the list of tasks, check the box next to the name of the required task and click the action button above the
    list of tasks.




Managing tasks in the Administration Console
You can perform the following actions with the tasks for Kaspersky Endpoint Security in the Administration
Console:

   Create new tasks.

   Edit task settings.


     If the user account which is used to access the Administration Server does not have permissions to edit
     the settings of certain functional scopes, the settings of these functional scopes are not available for
     editing.

                                                          139
   Start, stop, pause, and resume tasks.


     The Update task cannot be paused or resumed, it can only be started or stopped.


   Export and import tasks.

   Delete tasks.

In the list of tasks, you can monitor the task execution results: view the task status and the statistics for task
performance on the devices.

Information on the progress and results of task execution can be viewed in the list of events that Kaspersky
Endpoint Security sends to the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server (on the Events tab in the
workspace of the Administration Server <server name> node). You can also create a selection of events to
monitor the execution of tasks. For details on event selection, refer to Kaspersky Security Center documentation.

Task execution results are also saved locally on the device and in Kaspersky Security Center reports.

For general information about task management, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system .


  If the device is managed by a policy, it may not be possible to view and manage tasks created in Kaspersky
  Security Center using the command line or the graphical interface of the application.




Creating tasks in the Administration Console
To create a task for a group or set of devices in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console, perform one of the following actions:

      To create a task that will be run on devices included in the selected administration group, select this
      administration group in the console tree in the Managed devices folder, then select the Tasks tab in the
      workspace and click the New task button.
      The New task wizard starts for devices of the selected administration group.

      To create a task that will be performed on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices), select the
      Tasks folder in the console tree and click the New task button in the workspace.
      The New task wizard starts for the set of devices.

 2. At the first step of the wizard, select Kaspersky Endpoint Security and a task type.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.




                                                         140
 3. If you are creating a task for a set of devices, the Wizard prompts you to define the task scope. The task scope
    comprises the devices on which the task will be run.

    a. Specify the method for defining the task scope: select devices from the list of devices detected by the
       Administration Server; set device addresses manually; import a list of devices from a file or specify a
       previously configured selection of devices (for more details, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help
       system).

    b. Depending on the method you have specified for defining the task scope, in the window that opens, perform
       one of the following actions:

          In the list of detected devices, specify the devices on which the task will be run. To do so, select the
          check box in the list to the left of the device name.

          Click the Add or Add IP range button and enter the device addresses manually.

          Click the Import button and select the TXT file containing the list of device addresses in the window that
          opens.

          Click the Browse button and, in the window that opens, specify the name of the selection containing the
          devices on which the task will be run.

   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 4. Configure the available task settings by following the instructions in the Wizard.

 5. Enter the name of the new task and proceed to the next step in the Wizard.

 6. To start the task immediately after the Wizard finishes, in the final step, select the Run task after the wizard
    finishes check box.

 7. Complete the wizard.
   A new task will be displayed in the list of tasks.

To create a local task in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the administration group containing
    the necessary device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the required device and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task
    name> window.

 4. In the displayed window with the properties of the managed device, select the Tasks section.
   The list of tasks created for this device is displayed.

 5. Click Add.
   The Task Wizard starts.

 6. At the first step of the wizard, select Kaspersky Endpoint Security and a task type.
   Proceed to the next step of the wizard.

 7. Enter a name for the new task and configure the available task settings following the instructions of the wizard.


                                                             141
 8. Complete the wizard.
   A new task will be displayed in the list of tasks.



Changing task settings in the Administration Console
To edit task settings in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console, perform one of the following actions:

      To edit the settings of a task that is run on devices included in the specified administration group, select this
      administration group in the console tree, then select the Tasks tab in the workspace.

      To edit the settings of a task that is run on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices), select the
      Tasks folder in the console tree.

 2. In the list of tasks, select the required task and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task name> window.
   You can also open the task properties window using the Properties item in the task context menu.

 3. Edit the task settings. The availability of configurable settings depends on the type of task.
   The General, Notification, Schedule, and Revision history tabs of the task properties window are standard for
   Kaspersky Security Center; for more details, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

 4. Click Apply or OK in the Properties: <Task name> window to save the changes made.




Starting, stopping, pausing, and resuming tasks in the Administration
Console
To start, stop, pause, or resume a task in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console, perform one of the following actions:

      To start or stop a task that is run on devices included in the specified administration group, select this
      administration group in the console tree, then select the Tasks tab in the workspace.
      The list of tasks created for the selected administration group opens.

      To start or stop a task that is run on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices), select the Tasks
      folder in the console tree.
      The list of all tasks created on the Administration Server opens.

 2. In the list of tasks, select the required task, open the context menu of the task, and select the action that you
    want to perform.




Managing the application using the command line
Using the command line, you can install, uninstall, start, and stop Kaspersky Endpoint Security on the device, and
also manage the application locally.
                                                         142
The functional components of the application are supported by Kaspersky Endpoint Security local tasks that are
run in the operating system. You can enable or disable functional components of the application on a device by
starting or stopping Kaspersky Endpoint Security tasks in the command line. One-time device scans are also
performed by starting Kaspersky Endpoint Security tasks. You can define the settings for functional components
on the device and the device scan settings by configuring the Kaspersky Endpoint Security task settings.

In addition to the task settings, the following settings are provided for configuring the application:

   General Container Scan settings.

   Network traffic scan settings.

   General application settings that define the operation of the application as a whole and the operation of
   individual functions.

In the command line, Kaspersky Endpoint Security is managed using Kaspersky Endpoint Security management
commands.



Enabling automatic addition of kesl-control commands (bash
completion)
Automatic addition of kesl-control commands can be disabled for the bash shell.

To enable automatic addition of kesl-control commands in the current bash shell session, run the following
command:

  source /opt/kaspersky/kesl/shared/bash_completion.sh


To enable automatic addition for all new bash shell sessions, run the following command:

  echo "source /opt/kaspersky/kesl/shared/bash_completion.sh" >> ~.bashrc



Task management in the command line
The following application tasks are provided for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security using the command line:

   File Threat Protection. This task allows you to enable or disable File Threat Protection in real time and defines
   the settings for the File Threat Protection component. The task starts automatically when the application
   starts.

   Malware Scan. This task allows you to scan file system objects for malware on demand and defines the settings
   for the scan. You can use this task to perform a full or custom scan of the device.

   Critical Areas Scan. This task allows you to run a critical areas scan of the operating system on demand and
   defines the settings for the scan.

   Custom file scan. This task is designed for configuring and storing settings that are used when scanning the
   specified files and directories using the kesl-control --scan-file command. As a result of the command
   execution, the application creates and starts a temporary file scan task.



                                                         143
Container Scan. This task allows you to scan containers and images on demand and defines the settings for the
scan.

Custom Container Scan. This task is designed for configuring and storing settings that are used when scanning
the specified containers and images using the kesl-control [-T] --scan-container command. As a
result of the command execution, the application creates and starts a temporary Container Scan task.

Removable Drives Scan. This task allows you to monitor the connection of removable media to the device in real
time and defines the settings of the Removable Drives Scan and the scan of its boot sectors for malware.

Web Threat Protection. This task allows you to enable or disable Web Threat Protection and defines the
settings for the Web Threat Protection component.

Network Threat Protection. This task allows you to enable or disable Network Threat Protection and defines the
settings for the Network Threat Protection component.

Anti-Cryptor. This task allows you to enable or disable the protection of files from remote malicious encryption
and defines the settings for the Anti-Cryptor component.

Firewall Management. This task allows you to enable or disable firewall management and defines the network
connection control settings on the device.

Application Control. This task allows you to enable or disable Application Control and defines the settings of
the Application Control component.

Inventory. The task allows you to obtain information about all the application executable files stored on the
device.

Device Control. This task allows you to enable or disable Device Control and defines the settings for the Device
Control component. The task starts automatically when Kaspersky Endpoint Security starts.

Web Control. This task allows you to enable or disable Web Control and defines the settings of the Web
Control component.

Behavior Detection. This task allows you to monitor malicious activity of applications in the operating system.
The task starts automatically when Kaspersky Endpoint Security starts.

System Integrity Monitoring. This task allows you to perform real-time monitoring of the actions performed with
objects from the monitoring scope specified in the System Integrity Monitoring component settings.

System Integrity Check. This task allows you to check for changes in files and directories that you have included
in the monitoring scope, by comparing the current state of the monitored object with a previously recorded
state.

Licensing. This task provides the capability to activate an application installed on the device. The task starts
automatically when the application starts, and it resides in the device operating memory. The task has no
settings; license keys are managed using special management commands. The task cannot be started, stopped,
or deleted.

Update. Using this task, you can perform scheduled and on-demand updates of databases and application
modules and configure update settings.

Rollback. You can use this task to roll back the last update of application databases and modules.

Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration. This task allows you to enable or disable
integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) and specifies the integration settings.

                                                    144
    Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration This task allows you to enable or disable
    integration with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) and specifies the integration settings.

    Integration with KATA Sandbox. This task enables and disables integration with the KATA Sandbox component
    and specifies the integration settings.

    KUMA Integration. This task enables and disables integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis
    Platform and specifies the integration settings.

    Execution prevention for objects (EDR (KATA)). This task lets you enable and disable the use of Endpoint
    Detection and Response (KATA) execution prevention rules and also view a list of these rules.

    Execution prevention for objects (EDR Optimum). This task lets you enable and disable the use of Endpoint
    Detection and Response Optimum execution prevention rules and also view a list of these rules.

Each application task has a name used on the command line, an ID, and a type (see the table below).

IDs are unique for all tasks, including deleted tasks. The application does not reuse the identifiers of the deleted
tasks. The identifier of a new task is the next successive number to the identifier of the latest created task.

Task names are not case-sensitive.

During installation of the application, predefined tasks are created. These tasks cannot be deleted. Each
predefined task has a name and ID.

Tasks that you create while working with the application are called user tasks. When you create the task, you
specify the name for it. IDs for user tasks are defined and assigned by the application when the task is created. IDs
for user tasks are starting from 100.

During operation, the application creates temporary scan tasks. Temporary task names and IDs are assigned by the
application. Temporary tasks are automatically deleted when completed.

Application tasks
                                 Task                    Task name in command line         Task ID          Task type

   File Threat Protection                               File_Threat_Protection                1               OAS

   Malware Scan                                         Scan_My_Computer                     2                ODS

   Malware Scan (user task)                             user-defined                  starting from 100       ODS

   Custom file scan                                     Scan_File                            3                ODS

   Critical Areas Scan                                  Critical_Areas_Scan                  4                ODS

   Update                                               Update                               6               Update

   Update (user task)                                   user-defined                  starting from 100      Update

   Rollback                                             Rollback                             7              Rollback

   Rollback (user task)                                 user-defined                  starting from 100     Rollback

   Licensing                                            License                              9               License

   System Integrity Monitoring                          System_Integrity_Monitoring          11              OAFIM

   System Integrity Monitoring (user task)              user-defined                  starting from 100      ODFIM

   Firewall Management                                  Firewall_Management                  12              Firewall

   Anti-Cryptor                                         Anti_Cryptor                         13            AntiCryptor

   Web Threat Protection                                Web_Threat_Protection                14               WTP

   Device Control                                       Device_Control                       15           DeviceControl

   Removable Drives Scan                                Removable_Drives_Scan                16               RDS

                                                         145
                               Task                               Task name in command line        Task ID            Task type

  Network Threat Protection                                      Network_Threat_Protection           17                 NTP

  Container Scan                                                 Container_Scan                      18             ContainerScan

  Container Scan (user task)                                     user-defined                 starting from 100     ContainerScan

  Custom Container Scan                                          Custom_Container_Scan               19             ContainerScan

  Behavior Detection                                             Behavior_Detection                  20           BehaviorDetection

  Application Control                                            Application_Control                 21              AppControl

  Inventory                                                      Inventory_Scan                      22             InventoryScan

  Inventory (user task)                                          user-defined                 starting from 100     InventoryScan

  Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration   KATAEDR                             24               KATAEDR

  Web Control                                                    Web_Control                         26              WebControl

  Integration with KATA Sandbox                                  Standalone_Sandbox                  29           StandaloneSandbox

  Execution prevention for objects (EDR (KATA))                  KATAEDR_Prevention                  30           KATAEDRPrevention

  Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration    KATANDR                             31               KATANDR

  Execution prevention for objects (EDR Optimum)                 EDRO_Prevention                     32               Prevention

  KUMA Integration                                               KUMA                                33                 KUMA


You can perform the following actions with tasks:

   Start and stop all predefined and user tasks except the License task.

   Suspend and resume ODS, ODFIM, and InventoryScan tasks.

   Create and delete user tasks. Depending on the application usage mode, you can create the following types of
   tasks:

       Standard mode: ODS, Update, Rollback, ODFIM, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan;

       Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments: ODS, ODFIM, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.

   Change the settings for all user tasks and all predefined tasks, except for Rollback and License tasks.


      If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the settings of the
      predefined Update task also cannot be edited.


   Configure the task start schedule.



Viewing a list of tasks in the command line
To view the list of application tasks, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-task-list [--json]


  where:


  --json – output format for the list of application tasks. If a file format is not specified, the output will be an INI
  file.
                                                                  146
  The list of Kaspersky Endpoint Security tasks will be displayed.


The following information will be displayed for each task:

   Name: the task name

   ID: the task ID

   Type: the task type

   State: the current state of the task


  If the Kaspersky Security Center policy prohibits users from viewing and editing local tasks, information about
  the Scan_My_Computer, Critical_Areas_Scan, Container_Scan, Inventory_Scan, Update (in Standard mode)
  and Rollback (in Standard mode) tasks is not available.




Viewing the status of a task in the command line
To view a task state, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-task-state < task ID/name > [--json]


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format.

Application tasks can take the following main states:

   Started—Task is running.

   Starting—Task is being launched.

   Stopped—Task has been stopped.

   Stopping—Task is stopping.

The ODS, ODFIM, and InventoryScan tasks can also have one of the following states:

   Pausing — Task is pausing.

   Suspended — Task is suspended.

   Resuming — Task is resuming.




                                                        147
Creating a task in the command line
If the application is being used in standard mode, you can create the following types of tasks: ODS, Update,
Rollback, ODFIM, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.

If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, you can create the following types
of tasks: ODS, ODFIM, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.

You can create tasks with default settings or with settings specified in a configuration file.

To create a task with default settings, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --create-task < task name > --type < task type >


  where:


   < task name > is the name that you specify for the new task.

   < task type > is the identifier for the type of the created task.

To create a task with the settings specified in the configuration file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --create-task < task name > --type < task type > --file < path to the
  configuration file > [--json]


  where:


   < task name > is the name that you specify for the new task.

   < task type > is the identifier for the type of the created task.

   < path to file > is the full path to the configuration file with the settings that will be used for creating the
   task.

   --json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json option is
   not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.



Starting, stopping, pausing, and resuming tasks in the command line
You can start and stop predefined and user tasks, except for tasks of the License type.

You can suspend and resume tasks of ODS, ODFIM, and InventoryScan types.

To start a task, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --start-task < task ID/name > [-W] [--progress]




                                                         148
  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   [-W] enables the output of current events related to this task.

   [--progress] enables the display of task progress.
     Example:
     Start the task with ID 1 and enable the display of current events associated with the task:

     kesl-control --start-task 1 -W




  If an error occurs when starting a task and the task does not start, then after the application is restarted, an
  attempt is made to start the task again.


To stop a task, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --stop-task < task ID/name > [-W]


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   [-W] enables the output of current events related to this task.

To suspend a task, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --suspend-task < task ID/name >


To resume a task, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --resume-task < task ID/name >



Deleting a task in the command line
You can delete only user tasks. Predefined tasks cannot be deleted.

To delete a task, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --delete-task < task ID/name >


  where < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
  command line.




                                                                        149
Displaying task settings in the command line
You can display the current values of settings for all user tasks and all predefined tasks, except for Rollback and
License tasks (these tasks have no settings).

You can output the current values of task settings to the console or to a configuration file that you can use to
change task settings.

To output the current values of task settings to the console, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-settings < task ID/name > [--json]


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.

To output the current values of task settings to a configuration file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-settings < task ID/name > --file < path to configuration file > [--
  json]


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file into which the task settings will
   be written. If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a
   file already exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not exist, the
   configuration file will not be created.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.



Editing task settings in the command line
You can edit the settings for all user tasks and all predefined tasks, except for Rollback and License tasks.


  If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the settings of the predefined
  Update task also cannot be edited.




                                                           150
In the command line, you can edit the settings of tasks using the kesl-control --set-settings command:

   You can edit all task settings using the configuration file that contains the task settings. You can get the
   configuration file using the command for displaying task settings.

   You can edit individual task settings on the command line in the < setting name >=< setting value >
   format. You can get the current values of task settings using the command for displaying task settings.

   You can restore the task settings to their default values.

You can add or remove scan scopes and exclusion scopes using a configuration file that contains task settings or
command line options. Configuring scan scopes and exclusion scopes is available for tasks with the OAS, ODS,
OAFIM, ODFIM, and AntiCryptor types.


  In order to optimize the operation of scan tasks, it is recommended to add the path with snapshots mounted
  by the system in the read-only mode to the exclusions for the systems with the btrfs file system and enabled
  active snapshots. For example, for the systems based on SUSE/OpenSUSE, you can add the following
  exclusion for the path: /.snapshots/*/snapshot/.


For some tasks, separate management commands are also provided that allow you to edit task settings.



Editing task settings using a configuration file
To edit values of task settings using a configuration file:

 1. Output the task settings to the configuration file using the command kesl-control --get-settings.

 2. Open the configuration file and edit the values of the necessary settings.
   For tasks of the OAS, ODS, OAFIM, ODFIM, and AntiCryptor types, you can add or remove scan scopes and
   exclusion scopes.
   If you want to add a scan scope, add a [ScanScope.item_ #] section with the following settings to the file:

       AreaDesc is a description of the scan scope, which contains additional information about this scope.

       UseScanArea enables scanning of the specified scope.

       Path is a path to the directory with the objects to be scanned. You can specify a path to a local directory or
       enable scanning of remote directories mounted on a client device.

       AreaMask.item_# is a limitation of the scan scope. You can specify a mask for the name of the files to be
       scanned. Scanning is enabled by default for all objects in the scan scope. You can specify multiple
       AreaMask.item_# items.

   If you want to add an exclusion scope, add an [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section with the following
   settings to the file:

       AreaDesc – a description of the exclusion scope, which contains additional information about the exclusion
       scope.

       UseScanArea enables exclusion of the specified scope.



                                                          151
      Path is a path to the directory with the objects to be excluded. You can specify a path to a local directory
      or exclude remote directories mounted on a client device. Possible values for the setting depend on the
      type of task.

      AreaMask.item_# is a limitation of the exclusion scope. You can specify a mask for the name of the files
      that you want to exclude from the scan scope. By default, all objects in the scope are excluded.
         Example:
         [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_0000]
         AreaDesc=
         UseScanArea=Yes
         Path=/tmp/notchecked
         AreaMask.item_0000=*


   You can specify multiple [ScanScope.item_#] and [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] sections. The
   application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.

 3. Save the configuration file.

 4. Execute the command:
   kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > --file < path to configuration file > [--
   json]
   where:

      < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
      command line.

      --file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which the task
      settings will be imported.

      Specify the --json option if you are importing settings from a JSON configuration file. If the --json
      option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
      displayed.

  All values of task settings defined in the file will be imported into the application.



  If you change the allowlist, or prohibit launch of all applications or applications that affect the operation of
  Kaspersky Endpoint Security in the Application Control task settings, run the --set-settings command
  with the --accept option.




Editing task settings using the command line options
Using the kesl-control --set-settings command line options, you can edit individual values of task settings,
as well as add or remove scan scopes and exclusion scopes for tasks of the OAS, ODS, OAFIM, ODFIM, and
AntiCryptor types.


Configuring individual task settings

To edit individual values of task settings using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > < setting name >=< setting value > [< setting
  name >=< setting value >]

                                                          152
  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   < setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the task settings. You can get the
   current values of task settings using the command for displaying task settings.

  The values of the specified task settings will be changed.



  If you change the allowlist, or prohibit launch of all applications or applications that affect the operation of
  Kaspersky Endpoint Security in the Application Control task settings, run the --set-settings command
  with the --accept option.




Adding and removing a scan scope

To add a scan scope using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > --add-path < path >


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --add-path < path > adds the path to the directory with the objects to be scanned.

  A new [ScanScope.item_#] section will be added to the task settings. The application scans the objects in
  the directory specified by the Path setting. The remaining settings of the scan scope take default values.


  If the task settings already contain a [ScanScope.item_#] section with the specified value for the Path
  setting, a duplicate section is not added.


  If the UseScanArea setting is set to No its value will change to Yes after this command is executed and the
  objects located in this directory will be scanned.


  Example:
  Adding a scan scope for a task with ID=100:

  kesl-control --set-settings 100 ScanScope.item_0001.UseScanArea=Yes ScanScope.item_0001.Path=/home

  The following scan scope settings will be added to the task:

  [ScanScope.item_0001]

  AreaDesc=

  UseScanArea=Yes

  Path=/home

  AreaMask.item_0000=*



                                                                 153
To delete a scan scope using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > --del-path < path >


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --del-path < path > deletes the path to the directory with the objects to be scanned.

  The [ScanScope.item_#] section that contains the specified path will be deleted from the task settings. The
  application will not scan the objects in the specified directory.


Adding and removing an exclusion scope

To add an exclusion scope using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > --add-exclusion < path >


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --add-exclusion < path > adds the path to the directory with the objects that you want to exclude from
   the scan.

  A new [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section will be added to the task settings. The application will
  exclude objects in the directory specified by the Path setting from scans. The remaining settings of the
  exclusion scope take default values.


  If the task settings already contain an [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section with the specified value
  for the Path setting, a duplicate section is not added.


  If the UseScanArea setting is set to No its value will change to Yes after this command is executed and the
  objects located in this directory will be excluded from scans.


To delete an exclusion scope using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > --del-exclusion < path >


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --del-exclusion < path > deletes the path to the directory with the objects to be excluded.



                                                       154
  The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section that contains the specified path will be deleted from the
  task settings. The application will not exclude the objects in the specified directory from the scan.



Restoring default task settings in the command line
You can restore the default settings for all user tasks and all predefined tasks, except for tasks of the Rollback and
License types (these tasks have no settings).

To reset task settings to their default values, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings < task ID/name > --set-to-default


  where < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
  command line.


  The application changes the setting values to their defaults.



Configuring task schedule in the command line
If the application is being used in standard mode, you can configure the run schedule for the following types of
tasks: ODS, Update, Rollback, ODFIM, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.

If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, you can configure the run schedule
for the following types of tasks: ODS, ODFIM, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.

You can output the current values of the settings for the task run schedule to the console or to a configuration
file.

To output the current settings for the task run schedule to the console, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-schedule < task ID/name > [--json]


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.

To output the current settings for the task run schedule to a configuration file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-schedule < task ID/name > --file < path to configuration file > [--
  json]




                                                        155
  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   --file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file in which the settings for the task
   run schedule will be written. If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the
   current directory. If a file already exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory
   does not exist, the configuration file will not be created.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.
      Examples:
      Save the update task settings to a file named update_schedule.ini and save the created file in the current directory:

      kesl-control --get-schedule 6 --file update_schedule.ini

      Display the update task schedule in the console:

      kesl-control --get-schedule 6



You can edit the settings for the task run schedule in the following ways:

   Import the settings from a configuration file that contains all schedule settings.

   Using the command line, specify the individual settings for the task run schedule in the format < setting
   name >=< setting value >.

To edit the values of the settings for task run schedule using a configuration file, perform the following actions:

 1. Output the task settings to the configuration file using the command kesl-control --get-schedule.

 2. Edit the values of the necessary settings in the file and save the changes.

 3. Execute the command:
   kesl-control --set-schedule < task ID/name > --file < path to configuration file > [--
   json]
   where:

       < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
       command line.

       --file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which the task
       schedule settings will be imported.

       Specify the --json option if you are importing settings from a JSON configuration file. If the --json
       option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
       displayed.

  All values of the settings for the task run schedule defined in the file will be imported into the application.


  Example:
  Import the schedule settings from the configuration file named /home/test/on_demand_schedule.ini into the task with ID=2:

  kesl-control --set-schedule 2 --file /home/test/on_demand_schedule.ini



                                                                        156
To edit the individual values of the settings for the task run schedule using the command line, execute the following
command:

  kesl-control --set-schedule < task ID/name > < setting name >=< setting value > [< setting
  name >=< setting value >]


  where:


   < task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
   command line.

   < setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the settings for the task schedule.

  The values of the specified settings for the task run schedule are modified.




                                                        157
  Examples:
  To schedule the task to start every ten hours, specify the following settings:

     RuleType=Hourly


     RunMissedStartRules=No


     StartTime=2021/May/30 23:05:00;10


     RandomInterval=0


  To schedule the task to start every ten minutes, specify the following settings:

     RuleType=Minutely


     RunMissedStartRules=No


     StartTime=23:10:00;10


     RandomInterval=0


  To schedule the task to start on the 15th of every month, specify the following settings:

     RuleType=Monthly


     RunMissedStartRules=No


     StartTime=23:25:00;15


     RandomInterval=0


  To schedule the task to start on every Tuesday, specify the following settings:

     RuleType=Weekly


     StartTime=18:01:30;Tue


     RandomInterval=99


     RunMissedStartRules=No


  To schedule the task to start every 11 days, specify the following settings:

     RuleType=Daily


     RunMissedStartRules=No


     StartTime=23:15:00;11


     RandomInterval=0




Managing general application settings in the command line
General application settings define the operation of the application as a whole and the operation of individual
functions.




                                                                          158
You can manage general application settings using special management commands:

   Output the current values of general application settings to the console or to a configuration file.

   Edit general application settings using a configuration file containing all general settings, or using command line
   options in the < setting name >=< setting value > format.

Using general settings, you can:

   Configure the use of Kaspersky Security Network and the light version of anti-malware databases in the
   application.

   Configure the use of a proxy server in the application.

   Select the file operation interception mode (block/do not block files during a scan).

   Configure exclusions from the mount points scan (global exclusions).

   Configure exclusions from the process memory scan.

   Enable or disable Container Scan in real time.

   Enable or disable the detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or
   data.

   Enable or disable integration with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response.

   Configure the use of event logs.

   Configure a limit on CPU resource usage by scan tasks (of the ODS type).

   Limit the number of user scan tasks that a non-privileged user can start simultaneously.



Displaying general application settings
You can output the current values of general application settings to the console or to a configuration file that you
can use to edit application settings.

To output the current values of general application settings to the console, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-app-settings [--json]


  where --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the
  settings are output in the INI format.


To output the current values of general application settings to a configuration file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-app-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json]




                                                        159
  where:


   --file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file into which general settings of the
   application will be written. If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current
   directory. If a file already exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not
   exist, the configuration file will not be created.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.

  Example:
  Display the general application settings to a file named kesl_config.ini. Save the created file in the current directory:

  kesl-control --get-app-settings --file kesl_config.ini




Editing general application settings
In the command line, you can edit the general application settings using the command kesl-control --set-
app-settings:

   You can edit all general settings using the configuration file that contains the general application settings. You
   can get the configuration file using the command for displaying general settings.

   You can edit individual settings using command line options in the < setting name >=< setting value >
   format. You can get the current values of general application settings using the command for displaying general
   settings.

To edit values of general application settings using a configuration file:

 1. Output the general application settings to a configuration file.

 2. Edit the values of the necessary parameters in the file and save the changes.

 3. Execute the command:
   kesl-control --set-app-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json]
   where:

       --file < path to configuration file > is the full path to the configuration file with the general
       application settings. If you delete any parameter in the configuration file, the default value for that
       parameter will be displayed after the command is executed.

       Specify the --json option if you are importing settings from a JSON configuration file. If the --json
       option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
       displayed.

  All the values of the general settings defined in the file will be imported into the application.


To edit values of general application settings using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-app-settings < setting name >=< setting value > [< setting name >=
  < setting value >]



                                                                           160
  where < setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the general application settings.


  The values of the specified general settings will be changed.


  Examples:
  Import general settings into the application from the configuration file /home/test/kesl_config.ini:
  kesl-control --set-app-settings --file /home/test/kesl_config.ini
  Set the detail level for the trace file to low:
  kesl-control --set-app-settings TraceLevel=NotDetailed
  Add a mount point that you want to exclude from interception of file operations:
  kesl-control --set-app-settings ExcludedMountPoint.item_0000="/data"




Using filters to limit results of queries
A filter allows you to limit the query results when executing application management commands.

Filter conditions are specified using one or more logical expressions, which are combined using the logical operator
and. Filter conditions must be enclosed in quotation marks:

"< field > < comparison operator > '< value >'"

"< field > < comparison operator > '< value >' and < field > < comparison operator > '< value >'"

  where:


   < field > is the name of the field for the database.

   < comparison operator > is one of the following comparison operators:

        > is "greater than"

        < is "less than"

        like matches the specified value When specifying a value, you can use % masks: for example, the logical
        expression "FileName like '%etc%'" sets the limitation "contains the text "etc" in the FileName field"


           The like comparison operation works only with fields that are stored in the database as text. The
           like operation is not suitable for fields with dates, times, numbers, or other data types other than text.


        == is "equal to"

        != is "not equal to"

        >= is "greater than or equal to"

        <= is "less than or equal to"




                                                                         161
   < value > is the value of the field. The value must be enclosed in single quotation marks (').
   You can specify a date value as UNIX™ time (the number of seconds that have elapsed since 00:00:00 (UTC),
   January 1, 1970) or in YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss format. The user specifies the date and time in the user's local
   time zone, and the application displays them in the same time zone.

You can use a filter in the following application management commands:

   Display information about certain current events of the application:
   kesl-control -W --query "< filter conditions >"

   Display information about certain application events in the event log:
   kesl-control -E --query "< filter conditions >"

   Display information about certain objects in the Backup:
   kesl-control -B --query "< filter conditions >"

   Delete certain objects from the Backup:
   kesl-control -B --mass-remove --query "< filter conditions >"
     Examples:
     Get information about events that contain the text "etc" in the FileName field:

     kesl-control -E --query "FileName like '%etc%'"

     Display information about events with the ThreatDetected type:

     kesl-control -E --query "EventType == 'ThreatDetected'"

     Display information about events with the ThreatDetected type, created by tasks of the ODS type:

     kesl-control -E --query "EventType == 'ThreatDetected' and TaskType == 'ODS'"

     Get information about the events generated after the date specified in the UNIX time stamp system (the number of seconds that have
     elapsed since 00:00:00 (UTC), 1 January 1970):

     kesl-control -E --query "Date > '1583425000'"

     Get information about the events generated after the date specified in YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss format:

     kesl-control -E --query "Date > '2022-12-22 18:52:45'"

     Get information about files in the Backup storage that have the High severity level:

     kesl-control -B --query "DangerLevel == 'High'"




Exporting and importing application settings

  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is managed via Kaspersky Security Center, importing settings is not
  supported.



  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the settings of
  the predefined task of the Update type cannot be exported or imported.




                                                                        162
Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows you to export and import all application settings for troubleshooting, verifying
settings, or simplifying the application's configuration on other user devices. When exporting settings, all
application settings (including general Container Scan settings, network traffic scan settings, general application
settings, and task settings) are saved in a configuration file. You can use this configuration file to import settings
into the application.


  The application must be launched when settings are imported or exported. After the settings are imported,
  the application must be restarted.


When importing or exporting settings from an older application version, new settings are set to default values.
Importing settings to an older application version is not supported.

To export the application settings, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --export-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json]


  where:


   --file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file where the application
   settings will be saved.

   --json is specified to export the settings to the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json options is
   not specified, the settings will be exported to an INI file.

To import the application settings from the file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --import-settings - - file < configuration file path > [--json]


  where:


   --file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which you want to
   import settings into the application.

   --json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json option is
   not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.


  When you import application settings from a file, the UseKSN and CloudMode settings are set to No. To start
  or resume the use of Kaspersky Security Network, set the value of the UseKSN setting to Basic or
  Extended. To enable cloud mode, you must set the CloudMode setting to Yes. Cloud mode is available if use
  of KSN is enabled.



  After application settings are imported, internal task IDs may change. It is recommended to use task names to
  manage tasks.




                                                        163
Managing user roles using the command line
Access to Kaspersky Endpoint Security functions via the command line is provided to users in accordance with
their roles. A role is a set of rights and privileges for managing the application.

Four groups of system users are created in the operating system: kesladmin, kesluser, keslaudit, and nokesl. When
you assign an application role to a system user, the user is added to the corresponding group (see the Roles table
below). When you revoke a role from a user, this user is removed from the corresponding group.

If no application role is assigned to a system user, that user belongs to a separate group of users without rights.

Thus, the roles correspond to the four groups of operating system users:

   kesladmin – the Administrator role

   kesluser – the User role

   keslaudit – the Auditor role

   nokesl is assigned to a user if no other roles are assigned. In this case, the user belongs to a separate group of
   users without privileges

   User roles

       Role name            Role in       OS user                                             Permissions
                          application      group

      Administrator   admin             kesladmin   Managing application settings and task settings in the graphical interface of the application
                                                    and on the command line without using the sudo command.
                                                    Managing application licensing.
                                                    Assigning roles to users.
                                                    Revoking user roles (the administrator has no right to revoke the admin role from self).
                                                    View and manage users' Storages.

      User            user              kesluser    Manage only user file scan tasks.
                                                    Start and stop Update tasks.
                                                    View reports for the tasks created by this user.
                                                    View specific events that are common for all application users.

      Auditor         audit             keslaudit   Viewing application settings
                                                    View application status.
                                                    View all tasks, their settings, and start schedules.
                                                    View all events.
                                                    View all objects in Backup.

      —               —                 nokesl      No role is assigned in the application, no permissions.




Viewing a list of users and roles
To view a list of users and their roles, execute the following command:

  kesl-control [-U] --get-user-list




                                                                  164
Assigning a role to a user
To assign a role to a specific user, execute the following command:

  kesl-control [-U] --grant-role < role > < user >


  Example:
  To assign the audit role to the user test15:

  kesl-control --grant-role audit test15




Revoking a user role
To revoke a role from a specific user, execute the following command:

  kesl-control [-U] --revoke-role < role > < user >


  Example:
  To revoke the audit role from the user test15:

  kesl-control --revoke-role audit test15




                                                       165
Starting and stopping the application
After installing Kaspersky Endpoint Security to a device, the application is started automatically. By default, the
application then starts automatically when the operating system is booted (at the default level of execution for
each operating system).

By default, when Kaspersky Endpoint Security is started, the following functional components of the application
are started automatically:

   File Threat Protection.

   Device Control.

   Behavior Detection.

   Web Threat Protection—only if one of the supported browsers is installed in the operating system and local
   management of Web Threat Protection settings is allowed on the device (a policy is not applied or the "lock" is
   not set in the policy properties).

   Network Threat Protection—only if the Network Threat Protection settings on the device are defined through a
   policy. Network Threat Protection is enabled in the policy properties by default. If locally configured settings are
   applied on the device, Network Threat Protection is disabled by default.

When the application is started, service tasks are automatically started on the device to ensure the operation of
additional application functions: the application activation function and the Backup function.

By default, the application also starts user tasks configured on the command line, for which the "after application
startup" run mode (PS run mode) is configured.

If you stop the application, all tasks running on the device will be interrupted. Interrupted user tasks are not
resumed automatically after the application is restarted.




Starting and stopping the application using the Web
Console
To start or stop the application remotely:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. In the list, select the device on which you want to start or stop the application, and click the link with the device
    name to open the device properties window.

 3. Select the Applications tab.

 4. Select the Kaspersky Endpoint Security check box.




                                                          166
 5. Do one of the following:

      To start the application, click the Start button.

      To stop the application, click the Stop button.

You can monitor the application operation status by using the Protection status widget in the Monitoring and
reports / Dashboard window.




Starting and stopping the application using the
Administration Console
To start or stop the application on a client device:

 1. In the Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the administration group containing
    the necessary device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the device for which you want to start or stop the application. In the
    device context menu, select Properties.

 4. In the Properties: <Device name> window, select the Applications section.
   The right part of the window displays a list of Kaspersky applications installed on the device.

 5. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux.

 6. Do one of the following:


      To run the application, click the     button to the right of the list of Kaspersky applications or select Start
      in the application context menu.


      To stop the application, click the      button to the right of the list of Kaspersky applications or select Stop
      in the application context menu.




Starting and stopping the application using the
command line

  To run the application, the root account must be the owner of the following directories and only the owner
  must have write access to them: /var, /var/opt, /var/opt/kaspersky, /var/log/kaspersky, /opt, /opt/kaspersky,
  /usr/bin, /usr/lib, /usr/lib64.




                                                          167
Starting, restarting, and stopping Kaspersky Endpoint Security

To start the application, run the following command:

  systemctl start kesl


To stop the application, run the following command:

  systemctl stop kesl


To restart the application, run the following command:

  systemctl restart kesl


Monitoring the status of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

The Kaspersky Endpoint Security status is monitored by the watchdog service. The watchdog service is
automatically launched when the application starts.

In the event of an application crash, a dump file is generated and the application is restarted automatically.

To export application settings, run the following command:

  systemctl status kesl




                                                         168
Viewing the protection status of a device and
information about application performance
You can view information about the protection status of a device, as well as the status of Kaspersky Endpoint
Security and its components on the device.

You can get information about the protection status of a device in the following ways:

   In the Web Console or in the Administration Console, using the statuses of the client devices (OK, Critical,
   Warning). The device on which Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent is installed is a client device for
   Kaspersky Security Center. The status of a client device can change to Critical or Warning for the following
   reasons:

      In accordance with the rules defined in Kaspersky Security Center. For example, the status changes if a
      security application is not installed on the device, a virus scan has not been performed in a long time,
      application databases are outdated, the license has expired, or the application is unstable. For more details
      on the reasons for changing statuses and configuring conditions for assigning statuses, refer to the
      Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

      Kaspersky Security Center receives the device status from the managed application, i.e., from Kaspersky
      Endpoint Security.


        Receiving device status from a managed application must be enabled in Kaspersky Security Center in
        the lists of conditions for assigning the Critical and Warning statuses. Conditions for assigning device
        statuses are configured in the properties window of an administration group.


   For more details on client device statuses, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

   In the Web Console or in the Administration Console, using the statuses of functional components of
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security on the device. In the properties of Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed on the
   device, a list of the functional components of the application is displayed. For each component, its status is
   displayed.

   In the command line, using the command kesl-control --app-info. The command displays information
   about the operation of the application and the status of functional components and tasks of the application.




Viewing the protection status of a device in the Web
Console
To view the protection status of a device in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

                                                       169
 3. In the list, find the device for which you want to view information and click the device name.

 4. In the properties window of the managed device that opens, on the General tab, select the Protection section.

The Protection section displays the following information about the device:

   Visible in the network is the visibility of the selected device in the network: Yes or No.

   Device status is the status of the client device generated based on the protection status criteria set by the
   administrator for the selected device and the device activity in the network: OK, Critical, or Warning.

   Status description represents the reasons for changing the status of the device to Critical or Warning.

   Protection status represents the current status of File Threat Protection on the selected device, such as
   Running, Stopped, or Paused.

   Last full check represents date and time when the last full scan task was completed on the selected device.

   Viruses detected represents a total number of malicious objects detected on the selected device (detected
   threat counter) since Kaspersky Endpoint Security was installed.

   Objects that failed disinfection represents a number of infected objects that Kaspersky Endpoint Security
   was unable to disinfect.




Viewing the protection status of a device in the
Administration Console
To view the protection status of a device in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the administration group containing
    the necessary device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the required device and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task
    name> window.

 4. In the window that opens with the properties for the managed device, select the Protection section.

The Protection section displays the following information about the device:

   Device status: status of the client device generated based on the criteria set by the administrator for the
   protection status of the selected device and the device activity in the network.

   All problems: complete list of problems detected by the managed applications installed on the selected device.
   Each problem has a status that the application prompts to assign to the device.

   Real-Time Protection status: current status of File Threat Protection on the selected device, such as Running
   or Stopped. When the protection status changes, the new status is displayed in the device properties window
   only after the device is synchronized with the Administration Server.

   Last on-demand scan: date and time when the last malware scan was performed on the selected device.


                                                         170
   Total threats detected: total number of threats detected on the selected device since the installation of the
   application (first scan) or since the last reset of the threat counter.
   To reset the counter, click the Reset button.

   Active threats: the number of unprocessed files on the selected device.




Viewing information about the operation of an
application in the Web Console
To view information about the application operation in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. In the list, find the device for which you want to view information and click the device name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
   The application properties window opens.

This window displays the following information about Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   The General tab in the Information section displays general information about the installed application:

      Name is the name of the application.

      Version is the version number of the application.

      Installed is the date and time when the application was installed on the device.

      Last software update is the date and time when Kaspersky Endpoint Security software modules were last
      updated.

      Last synchronization is the date and time of the last connection of the device to the Kaspersky Security
      Center Administration Server.

      Current status: status of File Threat Protection on the device, such as Running or Paused.

      The Installed updates block contains information about installed versions of application updates.

      Under Application databases, you can find information about the date and time of the application database
      update release and the date and time of the last update.

   On the General tab, the Licenses section contains information about license keys added to the application and
   the licenses corresponding to these keys.


                                                          171
   On the General tab, the Components section contains a list of functional components of the application. The
   status (for example, Stopped, Suspended, Not Installed) and version of each component is displayed.
   In the Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments line, you can see information about the
   application usage mode:

      The Running status means that the application is being used in Light Agent mode.

      The Not installed status means that the application is being used in standard mode.

   The Events tab displays a list of application events on the device.

   The Event settings tab displays the types of events that the application stores in event storage and how long
   they are stored.

   On the Application settings tab, you can do the following:

      In the Detection and Response section, you can manage network isolation of a device.

      In the Application Control section, you can export configured component settings and application
      categories to a file, and import them from a file.

      In the Statistics section, you can view application statistics and the list of mount points.




Viewing information about the operation of an
application in the Administration Console
To view information about the application operation in the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console:

 1. In the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the
    administration group containing the required device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the required device and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task
    name> window.

 4. In the window that opens with the properties of the managed device, select the Applications section.
   The right part of the window displays a list of Kaspersky applications installed on the device.

 5. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security and double-click it to open the application properties window.
    Alternatively, you can use the Properties button in the lower part of the window.
   The application properties window opens.

This window displays the following information about Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   The General section contains general information about the installed application:

      Version number is the version number of the application.

      Installed is the date and time when the application was installed on the device.


                                                        172
      Current status is the status of File Threat Protection on the device, such as Running or Paused.

      Last software update: date and time when Kaspersky Endpoint Security software modules were last
      updated.

      Installed updates – information about installed versions of application updates.

      Application databases is the date and time when the application database update was released.

   In the Application Control section, you can export configured component settings and application categories
   to a file, and import them from a file.

   The Statistics section displays application statistics and information about mount points.

   The Components section contains a list of standard application components. The status (for example,
   Stopped, Suspended, Not Installed) and version of each component is displayed.
   In the Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments line, you can see information about the
   application usage mode:

      The Running status means that the application is being used in Light Agent mode.

      The Not installed status means that the application is being used in standard mode.

   The License keys section contains information about the active and reserve license keys.

   The Event settings section displays the types of events that the application stores in event storage and how
   long they are stored.

   The Advanced section contains information about the application administration plug-in.




Viewing information about the operation of an
application in the command line
To view information about the application, run the following command:

  kesl-control --app-info [--json]


  where --json: output data in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are output in the
  INI format.


As a result of the command execution, the following information will be displayed in the console:

   Name. Application names.

   Version. Current application version.

   Policy. Information about whether a Kaspersky Security Center policy is applied on the device.




                                                       173
Information about the main license under which the application is being used:

   Application license information Application license information or application license key status.

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security license expiration date. Date and time when the application license expires,
   in UTC.

License information about the license that activates additional functionality of the application. These fields are
displayed if any additional functionality keys have been added to the protected device:

   EDR Optimum license information. Information about the license under which the Kaspersky Endpoint
   Detection and Response Optimum functionality is used, or the status of the EDR Optimum license key.

   EDR Optimum license expiration date. Date and time when the license for using Kaspersky Endpoint
   Detection and Response Optimum functionality expires, in UTC.

   KUMA license information. Information about the license under which the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and
   Analysis Platform functionality is being used, or the status of the KUMA license key.

   KUMA license expiration date. Expiration date and time (UTC) of the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and
   Analysis Platform functionality license.

Subscription status. Subscription status. This field is displayed if the application is started under a
subscription.

MDR BLOB file status. Status of the BLOB configuration file for integration with Kaspersky Managed
Detection and Response.

Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response license expiration date. Date and time when the Kaspersky
Managed Detection and Response license expires, in UTC. This field is displayed if a BLOB configuration file has
been loaded for the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response integration.

Backup state. Backup state.

Backup usage. Backup size.

Last run date of the Scan_My_Computer task. Time of the last Malware Scan task.

Last release date of databases. Date and time the application databases were last released.

Application databases. Information about whether the application databases were downloaded.

Using Kaspersky Security Network. Information about using Kaspersky Security Network: Extended KSN
mode, Basic KSN mode or Disabled.

Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments. Information that the application is being used in Light
Agent mode to protect virtual environments. If the application is being used in standard mode, this field is not
displayed.

Kaspersky Security Network infrastructure. Information about the infrastructure solution used to work with
Kaspersky reputation databases: Kaspersky Security Network or Kaspersky Private Security
Network.

Integration with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response. Status of integration with Kaspersky
Managed Detection and Response: Enabled, Disabled.


                                                     174
   Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Integration. Status of integration with Kaspersky
   Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum.

   File Threat Protection. Real-time File Threat Protection status.

   Container monitoring. Real-time Container Scan status.

   System Integrity Monitoring. System Integrity Monitoring component status.

   Firewall Management. Firewall Management component status.

   Anti-Cryptor. Anti-Cryptor component status.

   Web Threat Protection. Web Threat Protection component status.

   Device Control. Device Control component status.

   Removable Drives Scan. Removable Drives Scan component status.

   Network Threat Protection. Network Threat Protection component status.

   Behavior Detection. Behavior Detection component status.

   Application Control. Application Control component status.

   Web Control. Web Control component status.

   Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration. Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
   Response (KATA) integration status.

   Integration with KATA Sandbox. KATA Sandbox Integration status.

   Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration. Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis
   Platform Integration status.

   Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration Kaspersky Network Detection and
   Response (KATA) integration status.

   Post-update actions. Application update actions and the actions to be performed by the user.

   Unstable application operation. Information about application failure and dump file creation. This field is
   displayed if a failure occurred the last time the application was launched.




Viewing application statistics
To improve performance, you can exclude the files that are most frequently scanned by the File Threat Protection
component, the paths to processes that are most frequently scanned by the Behavior Detection component, and
the mount points detected on the device.


  On devices with operating systems that support fanotify, the most effective way to improve performance is
  to exclude mount points.



                                                       175
You can view statistics about the most frequently scanned files and started processes, as well as a list of detected
mount points in the following ways:

   in the Web Console

   in the Administration Console

   on the command line

You can configure the parameters for how the application calculates and displays statistics in the kesl.ini
configuration file in the [ScannerImpactStats] section.



Viewing application statistics in the Web Console
To view application statistics in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. In the list, find the device for which you want to view information and click the device name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

 6. In the application properties window that opens, on the Application settings tab, select Statistics → Scan
    statistics.
   The Scan statistics window will open.
   The Scan statistics window displays the following application statistics:

      The Most frequently scanned applications (File Threat Protection) block displays the paths to the
      applications that the File Threat Protection component scans most frequently, and the number of times the
      component accesses these applications. Files are displayed in descending order of the number of times
      they are accessed.

      Under Most frequently scanned applications, you can find paths to the processes that Kaspersky
      Endpoint Security detects most often and the number of such detections. Paths to processes are displayed
      in descending order of the number of detections.

   Using the Export buttons located at the top of each block, you can export the statistics displayed in that block
   to a text file.




                                                          176
Viewing application statistics in the Administration Console
To view application statistics in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the
    administration group containing the required device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the required device and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task
    name> window.

 4. In the window that opens with the properties of the managed device, select the Applications section.
   The right part of the window displays a list of Kaspersky applications installed on the device.

 5. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security and double-click it to open the application properties window.
    Alternatively, you can use the Properties button in the lower part of the window.

 6. In the window that opens, select Statistics → Scan statistics.
   The following application statistics will be displayed in the window on the right:

      The Most frequently scanned applications (File Threat Protection) block displays the paths to the
      applications that the File Threat Protection component scans most frequently, and the number of times the
      component accesses these applications. Files are displayed in descending order of the number of times
      they are accessed.

      Under Most frequently scanned applications, you can find paths to the processes that Kaspersky
      Endpoint Security detects most often and the number of such detections. Paths to processes are displayed
      in descending order of the number of detections.

   Using the Export buttons under each block, you can export the statistics displayed in that block to a text file.



Viewing a list of mount points in the Web Console
To view the list of mount points in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. In the list, find the device for which you want to view information and click the device name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.


                                                          177
 6. In the application properties window that opens, on the Application settings tab, select Statistics → Mount
    points.
   The Mount points window opens.
   The Mount points window displays a list of paths to mount points found on the device and information about
   whether the mount point has been added to the scan exclusions. The list of mount points is sorted as follows:

      Static, system, service and other mount points

      Mounted snap packages and mount points in their namespaces

      Mount points created by the Docker container management system

   By clicking the Export button, located at the top of the window above the list, you can export the list of mount
   points to a text file.



Viewing the list of mount points in the Administration Console
To view the list of mount points in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the
    administration group containing the required device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the required device and double-click it to open the Properties: <Task
    name> window.

 4. In the window that opens with the properties of the managed device, select the Applications section.
   The right part of the window displays a list of Kaspersky applications installed on the device.

 5. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security and double-click it to open the application properties window.
    Alternatively, you can use the Properties button in the lower part of the window.

 6. In the window that opens, select Statistics → Mount points.
   On the right, the window displays the list of paths to mount points detected on the device and information
   about whether the mount point has been added to the scan exclusions. The list of mount points is sorted as
   follows:

      Static, system, service and other mount points

      Mounted snap packages and mount points in their namespaces

      Mount points created by the Docker container management system

   By clicking the Export button below the list, you can export the list of mount points to a file in text format.




                                                         178
Viewing application statistics and the list of mount points in the
command line
To view application statistics and the list of mount points, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-S] --get-statistic [--files] [--processes] [--mountpoints]


  where:


   --files: statistics of files most frequently scanned by the File Threat Protection component, and the number
   of times the component accesses these files.

   --processes: statistics of processes that are most frequently detected by the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
   application, and the number of such detections.


     Excluding processes from scanning by the Behavior Detection component does not remove these
     processes from statistics, but it improves the performance of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
     application.


   --mountpoints: list of mount points.

  In the output, mount points are sorted as follows:


   Static, system, service and other mount points

   Mounted snap packages and mount points in their namespaces

   Mount points created by the Docker container management system

  You can specify one or more options in any combination or no options at all. If you do not specify any options,
  the application displays three lists: statistics on the most frequently scanned files, statistics on the most
  frequently detected processes, and the list of mount points found on the device.




Obtaining system performance metrics
Kaspersky Endpoint Security affects the operating system. To help you analyze the impact, the application can
obtain metrics associated with application performance.

To configure the collection of operating system performance metrics, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-J] --export-metrics [--period < interval in seconds between exports >|--
  interactive]




                                                       179
  where:


   --period enables periodic output of results.

   --interactive enables interactive output (on the Enter key being pressed).

You can publish exported metrics to monitoring systems such as Prometheus and Zabbix. To integrate with
monitoring systems, you can use a script that gets information from the application and publishes it to the
monitoring system. To get the script, you can contact Technical Support.




                                                       180
Updating application databases and modules

  The update functionality (including anti-virus signature updates and code base updates) may not be available
  in the application in the territory of the USA.


Updating the databases and application modules of Kaspersky Endpoint Security ensures up-to-date protection
on your device. New viruses, malware, and other types of threats appear worldwide on a daily basis. The application
databases contain information about the threats and the ways to neutralize them. To detect threats quickly, you
are urged to regularly update the application databases and modules.


  Current application license is required for regular database updates. If there is no current license, you will only
  be able to perform one update.


During the update process, the databases and application modules are downloaded and installed on your device.
You can obtain updates for databases and application modules from Kaspersky update servers, from the
Administration Server repository, from local or network directories, and from other update sources.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the directory on
  the SVM is used as an update source.


During an update, the application modules and databases on your device are compared with the up-to-date
version at the update source. If your current databases and application modules differ from their respective up-
to-date versions, the missing portions of the updates will be installed on your device.


  If the databases are obsolete, the update package may be large, which may cause additional Internet traffic
  (up to several dozen MB). The amount of the disk space can be up to 3 GB.


Updates are downloaded from Kaspersky update servers or from other FTP, HTTP, or HTTPS servers over standard
network protocols. By default, Internet connection settings are determined automatically. If you are using a proxy
server, specify the proxy server settings in the general settings of the application.

Regardless of the update source, the update package is downloaded and the database and application module
updates are installed on the device using the Update task. An Update predefined task is created in the application.
Using this task, you can perform scheduled and on-demand updates of databases and application modules and
configure update settings.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, databases on
  protected virtual machines are updated using a special Update local task, where the directory on the SVM is
  specified as the update source. The update task starts automatically. You cannot delete this task or change
  its settings.



  Updating databases and application modules using tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center is not
  supported.




                                                         181
If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in standard mode, in Kaspersky Security Center, you can use the Update
group task that the Initial Configuration Wizard creates after installing the administration MMC plug-in or the
Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration web plug-in. You can also create update user tasks in the command
line and in Kaspersky Security Center.

You can configure the following settings for updating databases and application modules:

   Select the source from which the application will receive updates, depending on the update scenario used.

   Configure the response timeout of a selected update source when attempting to connect to it. If an update
   source does not respond within the specified time, the application contacts the next update source in the list.

   Configure the task run schedule for updates. By default, the application updates the databases once every 60
   minutes.

You can also receive automatically installed application updates (autopatches). In the update task settings, you can
select how you want autopatches to be downloaded and installed: download and install, only download, or do not
download.




Updating databases and modules
During an update, the following objects are downloaded and installed on your device:

   Application databases. Application databases include databases of malware signatures, a description of
   network attacks, databases of malicious and phishing web addresses, databases of banners, spam databases,
   and other data.
   If the database update on the device is interrupted or finishes with an error, the application continues to use
   the previously installed database version. If application databases were not installed before, the application
   continues functioning in "without databases" mode. Database and application module updates are still available.
   If the database update is successful, but the databases themselves are corrupted and the application
   terminates with an error several times in a row, the databases are automatically deleted. The application
   continues to work in the "without databases" mode; the database and application module update functionality
   remains available.
   The databases are up to date if they were downloaded less than three days ago. By default, the application
   generates the Application databases are out of date event if the last installed database updates were
   published on the Kaspersky servers more than three but less than seven days ago. If the databases have not
   been updated for seven days, the application generates the Application databases are totally out of date
   event.

   Application modules. Module updates are intended to eliminate vulnerabilities in the application and to improve
   methods of protecting devices. Module updates may change the behavior of application components and add
   new capabilities.
   The application module can be installed regardless of the state of the application (started or stopped, managed
   by a Kaspersky Security Center policy) and the update schedule. Kaspersky Endpoint Security continues
   protecting your device during the application modules update procedure. During the update, application
   settings and the application log file are migrated to the new version of the application.
   If the transfer of application settings fails for any reason, the application is set to the default values.
   Changes to the application settings made after the update is complete and before the application restarts are
   not saved.
   If the application does not work properly after the update, it automatically rolls back to the previous version. It
   is recommended to contact Kaspersky Technical Support.


                                                          182
Updating sources and update scenarios
An update source is a resource that contains updates for Kaspersky Endpoint Security databases and application
modules. Update sources can be FTP, HTTP, or HTTPS servers (such as Kaspersky update servers), as well as local
or network directories mounted by the user.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the databases on
  the protected virtual machines are updated from the directory on the SVM.


The main application update sources are Kaspersky update servers. You can specify other update sources in the
Update task settings. If an update cannot be performed from an update source, Kaspersky Endpoint Security
switches to the next update source.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security supports the following scenarios for updating databases and application modules:

   Update from Kaspersky update servers. Kaspersky update servers are located in different countries around the
   world, which ensures a high reliability of updates. If an update cannot be performed from one server, the
   application switches over to the next server. Updates are downloaded via HTTPS protocol.

   Centralized update Centralized update reduces external Internet traffic, and provides for convenient
   monitoring of the update.
   Centralized update consists of the following steps:

    1. Download the update package to a repository within the organization's network.
      You can use the repository of the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server as the repository.
      The update package is downloaded to the Administration Server repository via the Download updates to
      Administration Server repository task of the Administration Server.
      If you manage the application using Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console, you can use the repositories
      of the distribution points (devices with Network Agent installed) as the repository. For more details about
      distribution points, refer to Kaspersky Security Center Help.

    2. Distribute the update package to client devices
      The update package is distributed to the client devices by the Update task of Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
      In the task settings, select Kaspersky Security Center as the update source.

   Updating from a local or network directory (SMB/NFS) mounted by a user, or from an FTP, HTTP, or HTTPS
   server. You can specify a custom update source in Update task settings.




                                                         183
Updating application databases and modules in the Web
Console

  The procedure for updating Kaspersky Endpoint Security databases and application modules depends on the
  application usage mode. This section describes the procedure for updating the application in standard mode.
  If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the databases and application
  modules cannot be updated using the tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center. Updates are performed
  using a local predefined task.


In the Web Console, you can update databases and application modules using the Update task. You can use the
automatically created Update group task, as well as create user tasks for updating.

To configure update settings in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Tasks.
   The list of tasks opens.

 2. Do one of the following:

      If you want to edit the settings of a task that is run on all devices included in a specific administration group,
      click the link in the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the administration group in
      the window that opens.
      The list displays only tasks configured for the selected administration group.

      If you want to edit the settings of a task that is run on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices),
      click the link in the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the top node with the
      name of the Administration Server in the window that opens.
      The list displays all tasks created on the Administration Server.

 3. In the list of tasks, select the required Update task and open the task properties window by clicking the link in
    the task name.

4. In the task properties window, select Application settings tab. Select the Update sources section in the list on
   the left.

 5. Select the update source from which the application will receive updates for databases and modules,
    depending on the update scenario used.
   If you are managing the application using the Web Console, the list of update sources contains Kaspersky
   update servers and the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server. If you are managing the application
   using Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console, the list of update sources contains Kaspersky update servers
   and distribution points (for more details about distribution points, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help
   system). You can add other update sources to the list.
   You can create a list of update sources by selecting the Other sources on the local or global network option.
   You can specify FTP-, HTTP-, or HTTPS servers as update sources. If an update cannot be performed from an
   update source, Kaspersky Endpoint Security switches to the next update source. The application accesses
   update sources in the order in which they appear in the table.

 6. Go to the Settings section and configure other update settings.


                                                         184
 7. Select the Schedule tab and configure the schedule for running the update task.
    If you have selected Kaspersky Security Center as the update source, select When downloading updates to
    the repository from the Scheduled start drop-down list. For more details about scheduling tasks, refer to the
    Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

 8. Click the Save button to save the changes made.

The task will start according to the configured schedule. You can also run the task manually.

Update sources for the Update task section

              Setting                                                                            Description

  Update source                       In this section, you can select the update source:
                                             Kaspersky update servers, where database updates for Kaspersky applications are published (default
                                             value).
                                             Kaspersky Security Center – Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server (this option is available
                                             only for the Web Console).
                                             Distribution Points (this option is available only for the Kaspersky Security Center Cloud Console).
                                             Other sources on the local or global network – HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP servers or directories on local
                                             network servers.

  Use Kaspersky update servers        The check box enables or disables usage Kaspersky update servers as the update source, if the selected
  if other update sources are not     update sources are not available.
  available
                                      This check box is available if under Update sources, the Other sources on the local or global network or
                                      Kaspersky Security Center option is selected.
                                      The check box is selected by default.

  Custom update sources               This table contains a list of custom sources of database updates. During the update process, the application
                                      accesses update sources in the order they appear in the table.
                                      The table contains the following columns:
                                             Update source is HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP servers or directories on local network servers.
                                             The toggle button shows whether the source is used in the task (Enabled or Disabled). You can enable or
                                             disable the toggle button in the table, as well as select or clear the Use this source check box in the
                                             Update source window, which opens by clicking the link with the source name.

                                      This table is available if the Other sources on the local or global network option is selected.
                                      The table is empty by default.
                                      You can add, edit, delete, move up, or move down update sources in the table.

                                        Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                                        This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                                        Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                                        This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                                        Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                        This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                        The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                        Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




                                                                            185
Update task settings section

             Setting                                                                 Description

  Timeout for response from    The maximum period of time that the application waits for a response from the selected update source (in
  the update source (sec)      seconds). When no response has arrived by this time, an event involving a loss of communication with the update
                               source is logged in the task log.
                               Available values: 0-120. If 0 is specified, the period of time that the application waits for a response from the
                               selected source is unlimited.
                               Default value: 10 seconds.

  Application update           In the drop-down list, you can select how you want the automatically installed updates (autopatches) to be
  download mode                downloaded:
                                   Do not download. When this item is selected, autopatches are not automatically downloaded.
                                   Download only. When this list item is selected, autopatches are automatically downloaded, but not installed
                                   on client devices (default setting).
                                   Download and install. When this list item is selected, autopatches are automatically downloaded and installed
                                   on client devices. After an autopatch is installed, the application restarts automatically.




Updating application databases and modules in the
Administration Console

  The procedure for updating Kaspersky Endpoint Security databases and application modules depends on the
  application usage mode. This section describes the procedure for updating the application in standard mode.
  If the application is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the databases and application
  modules cannot be updated using the tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center. Updates are performed
  using a local predefined task.


In the Administration Console, you can update databases and application modules using the Update task. You can
use the automatically created Update group task, as well as create user tasks for updating.

To configure update settings in the Administration Console:

  1. In the Administration Console, perform one of the following actions:

        To edit the settings of a task that is run on devices included in the specified administration group, select this
        administration group in the console tree, then select the Tasks tab in the workspace.

        To edit the settings of a task that is run on one or multiple devices (a task for a set of devices), select the
        Tasks folder in the console tree.

 2. In the list of tasks, select the required Update task and double-click it to open the task properties window.

 3. In the task properties window, select the Update sources section in the list on the left.

 4. Select the update source from which the application will receive updates for databases and modules,
    depending on the update scenario used.
    The list of update sources contains Kaspersky update servers and the Kaspersky Security Center
    Administration Server. You can add other update sources to the list.
    You can create a list of update sources by selecting the Other sources on the local or global network option.
    You can specify FTP-, HTTP-, or HTTPS servers as update sources. If an update cannot be performed from an
    update source, Kaspersky Endpoint Security switches to the next update source. The application accesses
    update sources in the order in which they appear in the table.

 5. Select the Settings section and configure other update settings.

                                                                     186
 6. Select the Schedule section and configure the schedule for running the update task.
    If you have selected Kaspersky Security Center as the update source, select When downloading updates to
    the repository from the Scheduled start drop-down list. For more details about scheduling tasks, refer to the
    Kaspersky Security Center Help system.

 7. Click Apply or OK in the Properties: <Task name> window to save the changes made.

The task will start according to the configured schedule. You can also run the task manually.

Update sources for the Update task section

                 Setting                                                                             Description

  Update source                              In this section, you can select the update source:
                                                 Kaspersky update servers, where database updates for Kaspersky applications are published (default
                                                 value).
                                                 Kaspersky Security Center – Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server.
                                                 Other sources on the local or global network – HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP servers or directories on local
                                                 network servers.

  Use Kaspersky update servers if            The check box enables or disables usage Kaspersky update servers as the update source, if the selected
  other update sources are not               update sources are not available.
  available                                  This check box is available if under Update sources, the Other sources on the local or global network or
                                             Kaspersky Security Center option is selected.
                                             The check box is selected by default.

  Custom update sources                      This table contains a list of custom sources of database updates. During the update process, the
                                             application accesses update sources in the order they appear in the table.
                                             The table contains the following columns:
                                                 Source address – HTTP, HTTPS, or FTP servers or directories on local network servers.
                                                 Status indicates if the source is used in the task (In use or Not in use). You can change the status by
                                                 selecting or clearing the Use this source check box in the Update source window that is opened when
                                                 you click the Edit button.

                                             This table is available if the Other sources on the local or global network option is selected.
                                             You can add, edit, delete, move up, or move down update sources in the table.

                                               Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                                               This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                                               Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                                               This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                                               Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                               This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                               The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                               Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


                                             The table is empty by default.

Update task settings section

             Setting                                                                             Description

  Timeout for response from         The maximum period of time that the application waits for a response from the selected update source (in
  the update source (sec)           seconds). When no response has arrived by this time, an event involving a loss of communication with the update
                                    source is logged in the task log.
                                    Available values: 0–120. If 0 is specified, the period of time that the application waits for a response from the
                                    selected source is unlimited.
                                    Default value: 10 seconds.


                                                                              187
            Setting                                                              Description

  Application update          In the drop-down list, you can select how you want the automatically installed updates (autopatches) to be
  download mode               downloaded:
                                  Do not download. When this item is selected, autopatches are not automatically downloaded.
                                  Download only. When this list item is selected, autopatches are automatically downloaded, but not installed
                                  on client devices (default setting).
                                  Download and install. When this list item is selected, autopatches are automatically downloaded and installed
                                  on client devices. After an autopatch is installed, the application restarts automatically.




Updating application databases and modules in the
command line

  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, databases on
  protected virtual machines are updated using a special Update local task, where the directory on the SVM is
  specified as the update source. The update task starts automatically. You cannot delete this task or change
  its settings.


On the command line, you can update databases and application modules in the following ways:

   Using the Update predefined task. You can manually start, stop, pause, or resume this task and configure the
   task run schedule. You can configure scan settings by editing the settings of this task.

   Using user tasks for updating (tasks of the Update type). You can manually start user tasks and configure the
   task schedule.

   Update task settings

                   Setting                          Description                                             Values

      SourceType                        Source from which the application     KLServers (default value) — The application receives updates
                                        receives updates.                     from one of the Kaspersky update servers.
                                                                              Updates are downloaded via HTTPS protocol.
                                                                              SCServer . The application downloads updates to the protected
                                                                              device from the Administration Server installed on the local
                                                                              network. You can select this update source if you use Kaspersky
                                                                              Security Center for centralized administration of device
                                                                              protection in your organization.
                                                                              Custom — The application downloads updates from a custom
                                                                              source specified in the [CustomSources.item_#] section.
                                                                              You can specify directories on FTP, HTTP, and HTTPS servers or
                                                                              directories on any device mounted on the protected client
                                                                              device, including directories on remote devices mounted
                                                                              via the Samba or NFS protocols.

      UseKLServersWhenUnavailable       The application's access to           Yes (default value) — The application will connect to Kaspersky
                                        Kaspersky update servers if all       update servers if all custom update sources are unavailable.
                                        custom update sources are
                                                                              No — The application will not connect to Kaspersky update
                                        unavailable.
                                                                              servers if all custom update sources are unavailable.

      ApplicationUpdateMode             How automatically installed           Disabled : do not download or install autopatches.
                                        application updates (autopatches)
                                                                               DownloadOnly (default): download autopatches, but do not
                                        are downloaded and installed.
                                                                              install them.
                                                                              DownloadAndInstall : automatically download and install
                                                                              autopatches. After an autopatch is installed, the application
                                                                              restarts automatically.




                                                                  188
                  Setting                             Description                                                 Values

     ConnectionTimeout                    Response timeout (in seconds) of      You can use only integers within the range from 0 to 120.
                                          an update source while attempting     Default value: 10.
                                          to connect to it. If an update
                                          source does not respond within
                                          the specified time interval, the
                                          application contacts the next
                                          update source in the list.

     The [CustomSources.item_#] section contains the following settings:

     URL                                  Address of the custom update          The default value is not defined.
                                          source on the local area network or
                                                                                   Examples:
                                          the Internet.                            URL=http://example.com/bases/ – address of the HTTP server with the
                                                                                   directory that contains updates.
                                                                                   URL=/home/bases/ – directory on the protected computer that contains
                                                                                   application databases.




     Enabled                              Use of the update source specified    Yes – the application uses the update source.
                                          in the URL setting.
                                                                                No – The app doesn't use the update source.
                                                                                The default value is not defined.
                                             To run the task, at least one
                                             update source needs to be
                                             enabled.




Updating using Kaspersky Update Utility
To reduce Internet traffic, you can configure updates of application databases and modules on devices of the
organization's LAN from a shared directory by using the Kaspersky Update Utility. For this purpose, one of the
devices in the organization's LAN must receive update packages from the Kaspersky Security Center
Administration Server or from Kaspersky update servers and use the utility to copy the received update packages
to the shared directory. Other devices on the organization's LAN will be able to receive the update package from
this shared directory.

To configure Kaspersky Security Center to update databases from a shared directory using the Kaspersky Update
Utility:

 1. Install Kaspersky Update Utility on one of the devices of the organization's LAN.
   You can download the Kaspersky Update Utility distribution kit from the Kaspersky Technical Support website .

 2. Configure copying of the update package to the shared directory in the Kaspersky Update Utility settings.
   Select the update source (for example, the Administration Server repository) and the shared directory to which
   the Kaspersky Update Utility will copy update packages. For detailed information about using Kaspersky Update
   Utility, refer to the Kaspersky Knowledge Base .

 3. Configure updates of application databases and modules from the specified shared directory on other devices
    in the organization's local network:

    a. Open the properties of the Update task that will be performed on the required device using the Web
       Console or using the Administration Console.

    b. In the task properties, go to the Update sources section.

    c. In the Update sources section, select the Other sources on the local or global network option.


                                                                     189
 4. In the table of update sources, click the Add button and specify the path to the shared directory.


     The address of the update source must match the address specified in the Kaspersky Update Utility
     settings.


 5. Select the Use this source check box and click OK.

 6. In the table, set the order of the update sources using the Up and Down buttons.

 7. Save the changes to the task settings.

To configure Kaspersky Security Center to update databases from a shared directory using the command line:

 1. Install Kaspersky Update Utility on one of the devices of the organization's LAN.
   You can download the Kaspersky Update Utility distribution kit from the Kaspersky Technical Support website .

 2. Configure copying of the update package to the shared directory in the Kaspersky Update Utility settings.
   Select the update source (for example, the Administration Server repository) and the shared directory to which
   the Kaspersky Update Utility will copy update packages. For detailed information about using Kaspersky Update
   Utility, refer to the Kaspersky Knowledge Base .

 3. Configure updates of application databases and modules from the specified shared directory on other devices
    in the organization's local network: in the Update task settings, set SourceType=Custom and specify the
    path to the shared directory in the [CustomSources.item_#] section.


     The address of the update source must match the address specified in the Kaspersky Update Utility
     settings.




Rolling back application database and module updates

  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the task cannot
  be used to rollback database updates.


After the application databases are updated for the first time, the rollback of the application databases to their
previous versions becomes available.

Every time a user starts the update process, Kaspersky Endpoint Security creates a backup copy of the current
application databases. This allows you to roll back the application databases to a previous version if needed.

Rolling back the last database update may be useful, for example, if the new application database version contains
invalid signatures, which causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to block safe applications.

In the command line, to roll back updates, you can run the Rollback predefined task or create and run user tasks for
rolling back updates (tasks of the Rollback type).

In Kaspersky Security Center, you can create rollback tasks for administration groups or for individual devices using
the Web Console or the Administration Console.

The rollback task does not have any settings.
                                                         190
File Threat Protection
File Threat Protection component prevents infection of the device file system. The component is enabled
automatically with the default settings when Kaspersky Endpoint Security starts. It resides in the device operating
memory and scans all files that are opened, saved, and launched in real time.

Upon detecting malware, Kaspersky Endpoint Security may remove the infected file and terminate the malware
process started from this file.


  The operation of the component is affected by the file operation interception mode, which you can select in
  the general settings of the application. By default, access to the file is blocked for the duration of the scan.



  If the root user does not have access to a remote directory mounted on the device over NFS4, the application
  blocks access to such a file for all users.


If File Threat Protection is enabled and Container monitoring is enabled, the application also scans all namespaces
and containers on all supported operating systems.

You can enable or disable File Threat Protection, and also configure the protection settings:

   Select the file scan mode (when opened, or when opened and modified).

   Enable or disable scanning of archives, mail databases, email messages in text format.

   Temporarily exclude files in text format from rescans.

   Limit the size of an object to be scanned and the duration of the object scan.

   Select the actions to be performed by the application on the infected objects.

   Configure the scan scopes. The application will scan objects in the specified area of the file system.

   Configure exclusions of objects from scans. Scan exclusion is a set of conditions. When these conditions are
   met, the application does not scan the objects for viruses and other malware. You can exclude from scans:

      Objects by name or mask

      Objects by the name of the threats detected in them

      Files and directories in specified areas of the file system

      Processes and files being modified by the specified process

   Configure the use of the heuristic analyzer and iChecker technology during a scan.

   Enable or disable the logging of information about scanned non-infected objects, about scanning objects in
   archives, and about unprocessed objects.




                                                         191
To optimize the File Threat Protection component, you can exclude from scans any files being copied from
network directories. Files are scanned only after the process of copying to a local directory is finished. To exclude
files located in network directories from scans, configure exclusion based on processes for the utility used for
copying from network directories (for example, for the cp utility). If you manage the application using Kaspersky
Security Center, you can configure exclusion based on processes in the Web Console or the Administration
Console. If you are administering the application using the command line, you can configure an exclusion by
process by adding an [ExcludedForProgram.item_ #] section to the settings of the OAS task.




Configuring File Threat Protection in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can manage File Threat Protection in the policy properties (Application settings →
Essential Threat Protection → File Threat Protection).

File Threat Protection component settings

          Setting                                                                    Description

  File Threat Protection      This toggle switch enables or disables File Threat Protection component on all managed devices.
  enabled / disabled
                              The toggle switch is enabled by default.

  File Threat Protection      In this drop-down list, you can select the File Threat Protection component mode:
  mode                            Smart check (default value) – scan a file when there is an attempt to open it and scan it again when there is an
                                  attempt to close it if the file has been modified. If a process accesses and modifies a file multiple times in a certain
                                  period, the application scans the file again only when the process closes it for the last time.
                                  When opened – scan the file on an attempt to open it for reading, execution, or modification.
                                  When opened and modified – scan a file on an attempt to open it, and scan it again on an attempt to close it if the
                                  file has been modified.

  First action                In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has
                              been detected:
                                  Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                  Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                  Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                                  file and about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                                  Block access to the object.

  Second action               In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in
                              case the first action is unsuccessful:
                                  Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                  Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                  Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                                  file and about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                                  Block access to the object (default value).

  Protection scopes           Clicking the Configure scan scopes link opens the Protection scopes window.

  Scan archives               This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                              If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                              To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration of
                              archive scans by enabling and configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than
                              (MB) settings.
                              If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                              This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan SFX archives           This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are archives that contain an
                              executable extraction module.
                              If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                              If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                              This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                              This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                         192
          Setting                                                                       Description

  Scan mail databases        This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook®, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and other
                             mail applications.
                             If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan mail format files     This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                             If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Skip text files            Temporary exclusion of files in text format from scans.
                             If the check box is selected, the application does not scan text files if they are used by the same process within 10
                             minutes after the most recent scan. This setting makes it possible to optimize scans of application logs.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application will scan text files.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Skip file that is          In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application stops
  scanned for longer         scanning the file.
  than (sec)
                             Available values: 0–9999 . If the value is set to 0 , the scan time is unlimited.
                             The default value is 60 .

  Skip file larger than      In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
  (MB)                       Available values: 0–999999 . If the value is set to 0 , the application scans files of any size.
                             The default value is 0 .

  Log clean objects          This check box enables or disables logging of the ObjectProcessed event.
                             If this check box is selected, the application logs the ObjectProcessed event for all scanned objects.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application does not log the event.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Log unprocessed            This check box enables or disables logging of the ObjectNotProcessed event if a file cannot be processed during scan.
  objects
                             If this check box is selected, the application logs the ObjectNotProcessed event.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application does not log the event.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Log packed objects         This check box enables or disables logging of the PackedObjectDetected event for all packed objects that are
                             detected.
                             If this check box is selected, the application logs the PackedObjectDetected event.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application does not log the event.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Use iChecker               This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
  technology
                             If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                             The check box is selected by default.

  Use heuristic analysis     This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during an object scan.
                             The check box is selected by default.

  Heuristic analysis level   If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                 Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                 Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                 Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                 Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                 combination of quality of protection and impact on the performance of protected servers.




Protection scopes window
The table contains the protection scopes. The application will scan files and directories located in the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table contains one protection scope that includes all shared directories.
                                                                          193
Protection scope settings

     Setting                                Description

  Scope name       Protection scope name.

  Path             Path to the directory that the application scans.

  Status           The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


  Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



Add protection scope window
In this window, you can add and configure protection scopes.




                                                                       194
Protection scope settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  Scope name                Field for entering the protection scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                            The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope            This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                            If this check box is selected, the application processes this protection scope during operation.
                            If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this protection scope during operation. You can later
                            include this scope in the component settings by selecting the check box.
                            The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access       You can select the type of file system in the drop-down list:
  protocol, and path            Local (default value) – local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                                Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name
                                of the file system.
                                Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                                All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol           You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                                NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                                Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                                Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                            This drop-down list is available if the Shared or Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                       195
       Setting                                                                 Description

Path             The entry field for specifying the path to the directory that you want to include in the protection scope. You can use
                 masks and tags to specify the path.


                   You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                        [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                        [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                        [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                        [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                   You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                   id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                   Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                   For example:

                        [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                        [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                        [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                        [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                        directory >

                        [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                        < name >]/< path to local directory >

                   You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                   You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                   You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                   the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                   You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                   character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                   The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                   You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                 The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.
                 This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.
                 If the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, and the path is not specified, the application scans all
                 directories of the local file system.

Name of shared   The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource where the directories that you want to add to the
resource         protection scope are located.
                 The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                 in the Access protocol drop-down list.




                                                               196
            Setting                                                                               Description

   Masks                        The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                                By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                You can add, edit, or delete masks.

                                    Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                    This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                    The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                    Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




File Threat Protection exclusions
A protection exclusion is a set of conditions under which Kaspersky Endpoint Security will not scan objects for
viruses and other malware. You can also exclude objects by masks and threat names, and configure exclusions for
processes.

In the Web Console, you can configure File Threat Protection exclusions in the policy properties (Application
settings → Essential Threat Protection → File Threat Protection exclusions).

Settings of protection exclusions

           Setting                                                                              Description

   Exclusion scopes         Clicking the Configure exclusion scopes link opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this window, you can define the list of
                            protection exclusions.

   Exclusions by mask       Clicking the Configure exclusions by mask link opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can configure
                            the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Exclusions by            Clicking the Configure exclusions by threat name link opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window, you
   threat name              can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.

   Exclusions by            Clicking the Configure exclusions by process link opens the Exclusions by process window. In this window, you can
   process                  exclude the activity of processes.




Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                           Description

   Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

   Path                       Path to the directory excluded from scan.

   Status                     The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.


                                                                                  197
  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                 Description

  Exclusion scope name     Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                           The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope           This check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope when the application is running.
                           If the check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from scan or protection during its operation.
                           If the check box is cleared, the application includes this scope in scan or protection during its operation. You can later
                           exclude this scope from scan or protection by selecting the check box.
                           The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access      In this drop-down list, you can select the type of file system where the directories that you want to add to scan
  protocol, and path       exclusions are located:
                               Local, for local directories.
                               Mounted, for remote directories mounted on the device.
                               All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol          You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                               NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                               Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                               Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                           This drop-down list is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                     198
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Path                  Entry field for the path to the directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to
                        specify the path.


                          You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                               [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                               [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                               [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                               [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                          You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                          id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                          Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                          For example:

                               [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                               [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                               [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                               [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                               directory >

                               [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                               < name >]/< path to local directory >

                          You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                          You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                          You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                          the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                          You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                          character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                          The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                          To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                          The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                          mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                          You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                        The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.
                        This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

  Name of shared        The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
  resource              exclusion scope are located.
                        The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                        in the Access protocol drop-down list.

  Masks                 The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                        in the directory specified in the Path field.
                        By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                        You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.
                                                                      199
You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
  to be excluded from a scan.




Exclusions by process window
The table contains the exclusion scopes for exclusion by process The exclusion scope for exclusion by process lets
you exclude from scans the activity of the indicated process and files modified by the indicated process. By
default, the table includes two exclusion scopes that contain paths to the Network Agents. You can remove these
exclusions, if necessary.




                                                                   200
Exclusion scope settings for exclusion by process

            Setting                                     Description

   Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

   Path                       Full path to excluded process.

   Status                     The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

   This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




Trusted process window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes for exclusion by process.

Exclusion scope settings

             Setting                                                                   Description

   Process-based exclusion       Field for entering the Process-based exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in a table in the Exclusions by
   scope name                    process window.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

   Use / Do not use this         This toggle button enables or disables this scan scope exclusion.
   exclusion
                                 The check toggle button is switched on by default.

   Apply to child processes      Exclude child processes of the excluded process indicated by the Path to excluded process setting.
                                 This check box is cleared by default.

   Path to excluded              Full path to the process you want to exclude from scans.
   process

   File system, access           This group of settings lets you set scan exclusions for files modified by the process.
   protocol, and path
                                 In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system of the directories to be excluded from
                                 scans:
                                     Local, for local directories.
                                     Mounted – mounted directories.
                                     All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

   Access protocol               You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                                     NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                                     Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                                     Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                                 The Access protocol drop-down list is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                         201
          Setting                                                                                Description

  Path                   In the input field, you can enter the path to the directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use
                         masks to specify the path.

                           You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                           You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                           the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                           You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                           character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                           The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                           To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                           The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                           mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                           You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                         This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

  Name of shared         The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
  resource               exclusion scope are located.
                         The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is
                         selected in the Access protocol drop-down list.

  Masks                  The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are applied to objects
                         only inside the directory indicated in the File system, access protocol, and path block.
                         By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                         You can add, edit, or delete masks.

                           Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files excluded from a
                           scan.

                           This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



                           Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can modify the name
                           template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



                           Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can specify the
                           name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.


                              Examples:
                              The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
                              The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two characters (for example,
                              2020_my_file_09.html).




Configuring File Threat Protection in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can manage File Threat Protection in the policy properties (Essential Threat
Protection → File Threat Protection).




                                                                              202
File Threat Protection component settings

         Setting                                                                    Description

  Enable File             This check box enables or disables File Threat Protection component on all managed devices.
  Threat                  The check box is selected by default.
  Protection

  File Threat             In this drop-down list, you can select the File Threat Protection component mode:
  Protection mode
                              Smart check (default value) – scan a file when there is an attempt to open it and scan it again when there is an attempt
                              to close it if the file has been modified. If a process accesses and modifies a file multiple times in a certain period, the
                              application scans the file again only when the process closes it for the last time.
                              When opened – scan the file on an attempt to open it for reading, execution, or modification.
                              When opened and modified – scan a file on an attempt to open it, and scan it again on an attempt to close it if the file
                              has been modified.

  Scan                    This group of settings contains buttons that open windows where you can configure the scan scopes and scan settings.

  Action on threat        This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Action on threat detection window,
  detection               where you can configure the actions that the application performs on detected infected objects.




Scan scopes window
The table contains the scan scopes. The application will scan files and directories located in the paths specified in
the table. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes all directories of the local file system.

Scan scope settings

     Setting                                  Description

  Scope name         Scan scope name.

  Path               Path to the directory that the application scans.

  Status             The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


  Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.




                                                                          203
  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scopes.

Scan scope settings

          Setting                                                              Description

  Scan scope name       Field for entering the scan scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                        The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope        This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                        If this check box is selected, the application processes this scan scope.
                        If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this scan scope. You can later include this scope in the
                        component settings by selecting the check box.
                        The check box is selected by default.




                                                                 204
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the scan scope.
protocol, and path
                      You can select the file system type in the drop-down list of file systems:
                          Local (default value) – local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                          Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name
                          of the file system.
                          Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                          All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Shared or Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in
                       the drop-down list on the right:
                            NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                            Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                            Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want to add to the scan scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.
                       If the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, and the path is not specified, the application
                       scans all directories of the local file system.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the scan scope are
                      located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   205
            Setting                                                                        Description

   Masks                          The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                                  By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                  You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Scan settings window
In this window, you can configure file scan settings while File Threat Protection is enabled.

File Threat Protection settings

            Setting                                                                        Description

   Scan archives                  This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans archives.
                                  To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration
                                  of archive scans by enabling and configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger
                                  than (MB) settings in the General scan settings section.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan archives.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan SFX archives              This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are archives that contain an
                                  executable extraction module.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans self-extracting archives.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan self-extracting archives.
                                  This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan mail databases            This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and other
                                  mail applications.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans mail database files.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan mail database files.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan mail format files         This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans plain-text messages.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan plain-text messages.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Skip text files                Temporary exclusion of files in text format from scans.
                                  If the check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan text files if they are used by the same process
                                  within 10 minutes after the most recent scan. This setting makes it possible to optimize scans of application logs.
                                  If this check box is unselected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans text files.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Skip file that is scanned      In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, Kaspersky Endpoint
   for longer than (sec)          Security stops scanning the file.
                                  Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                                  Default value: 60.

   Skip file larger than          In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
   (MB)
                                  Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans files of any size.
                                  Default value: 0.

   Log clean objects              This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security logs ObjectProcessed type events for all scanned objects.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not log ObjectProcessed type events.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                             206
            Setting                                                                      Description

   Log unprocessed                This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during a
   objects                        scan.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security logs ObjectNotProcessed type events.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not log ObjectNotProcessed type events.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Log packed objects             This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                                  detected.
                                  If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security logs PackedObjectDetected type events.
                                  If this check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not log PackedObjectDetected type events.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   Use iChecker                   This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
   technology
                                  If the check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans only new or modified since the last scan files.
                                  If the check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans files regardless to the date of creation or modification.
                                  The check box is selected by default.

   Use heuristic analysis         This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                                  The check box is selected by default.

   Heuristic analysis level       If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                       Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                       Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                       Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                       Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                       combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.




Action on threat detection window
In this window, you can configure actions to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security on detected infected
objects:

File Threat Protection settings

     Setting                                                                       Description

   First action       In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has been
                      detected:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                          Block access to the object.

   Second             In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in case the first
   action             action is unsuccessful:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                          Block access to the object (default value).




File Threat Protection exclusions
A protection exclusion is a set of conditions under which Kaspersky Endpoint Security will not scan objects for
viruses and other malware. You can also exclude objects by masks and threat names, and configure exclusions for
processes.



                                                                           207
In the Administration Console, you can configure File Threat Protection exclusions in the policy properties
(Essential Threat Protection → File Threat Protection exclusions).

Settings of scan exclusions

    Group of settings                                                                 Description

   Exclusions                 This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this
                              window, you can define the list of scopes to be excluded from scan.

   Exclusions by mask         This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
                              configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Exclusions by              This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.

   Exclusions by              This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by process window. In this window, you
   process                    can exclude the activity of processes.




Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                       Description

   Exclusion scope name         Exclusion scope name.

   Path                         Path to the directory excluded from scan.

   Status                       The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

   This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



   The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



   Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan exclusion scopes.




                                                                            208
Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                 Description

  Exclusion scope name     Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                           The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope           The check box enables or disables exclusion of the scope from scan when the application is running.
                           If this check box is selected, the application excludes this area during scans.
                           If this check box is cleared, the application includes this area in the scan scope. You can later exclude this scope by
                           selecting the check box.
                           The check box is selected by default.




                                                                     209
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the exclusion scope.
protocol, and path
                      In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system of the directories to be excluded from
                      scans:
                          Local, for local directories.
                          Mounted – mounted directories.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in the drop-
                       down list on the right:
                           NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                           Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                           Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                         The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                         mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the exclusion scope
                      are located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   210
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Masks                      The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                             in the directory specified in the path field.
                             By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                             You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.




                                                                        211
   Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
   to be excluded from a scan.




Exclusions by process window
The table contains the exclusion scopes for exclusion by process The exclusion scope for exclusion by process lets
you exclude from scans the activity of the indicated process and files modified by the indicated process. By
default, the table includes two exclusion scopes that contain paths to the Network Agents. You can remove these
exclusions, if necessary.

Exclusion scope settings for exclusion by process

            Setting                                       Description

   Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

   Path                       Full path to excluded process.

   Status                     The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

   This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


You can also import the list of exclusions from a file by clicking Advanced -> Import and export the list of added
exclusions to a file by clicking Advanced -> Export selected or Advanced -> Export all.



Trusted process window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes for exclusion by process.

Exclusion scope settings for exclusion by process

          Setting                                                                    Description

   Exclusion scope        Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in a table in the Exclusions by process window.
   name                   The entry field must not be blank.

   Path to excluded       Full path to the process you want to exclude from scans.
   process

   Apply to child         Exclude child processes of the excluded process indicated by the Path to excluded process setting.
   processes
                          This check box is cleared by default.

   Use this scope         The check box enables or disables this exclusion scope.
                          If this check box is selected, the application excludes this area during scans.
                          If this check box is cleared, the application includes this area in the scan scope. You can later exclude this scope by selecting
                          the check box.
                          The check box is selected by default.




                                                                           212
       Setting                                                                     Description

  Path to modified   This group of settings lets you set scan exclusions for files modified by the process.
  files              In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system of the directories to be excluded from scans:
                         Local, for local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                         Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name of the
                         file system.
                         Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                         All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                         All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

                      If Mounted or Shared is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then you can select the remote access protocol in
                      the drop-down list of access protocols:
                           NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                           Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                           Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                      If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory that you
                      want add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks to specify the path. The entry field must not be blank.

                        You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                        You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in the
                        file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                        You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the / character) in
                        the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                        The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                        To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                        The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all mount
                        points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                        You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.




  Filesystem name    The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the exclusion scope are
                     located.
                     The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is selected in
                     the drop-down list on the right.

  Masks              The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects in the
                     directory specified in the Path to modified files field.
                     You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Configuring File Threat Protection in the command line
In the command line, you can manage File Threat Protection using the File Threat Protection predefined task
(File_Threat_Protection).

The File Threat Protection task is started by default. You can start and stop this task manually.


  Administrator role privileges are required to start and stop the File Threat Protection task from the command
  line.


You can configure File Threat Protection settings by editing the settings of the File Threat Protection predefined
task.




                                                                        213
File Threat Protection task settings
The table describes all available values and default values of all the settings that you can specify for the File Threat
Protection task.

File Threat Protection task settings

               Setting                                         Description                                                            Values

   ScanArchived                        Enables scanning of archives (including SFX self-                  Yes —Scan archives. If the FirstAction=Recommended
                                       extracting archives).                                              value is specified, then, depending on the archive type, the
                                       The application scans the following archives: .zip;                application deletes either the infected object or the entire
                                       .7z*; .7-z; .rar; .iso; .cab; .jar; .bz; .bz2; .tbz; .tbz2; .gz;   archive that contains the threat.
                                       .tgz; .arj. The list of supported archive formats                  No (default value) — Do not scan archives.
                                       depends on the application databases being
                                       used.


                                           We do not recommend enabling this
                                           setting because scanning archives
                                           impacts performance due to the fact that
                                           access to the archive file is blocked while
                                           the file is being unpacked to a temporary
                                           directory and scanned.




   ScanSfxArchived                     Enables scanning of self-extracting archives only                  Yes — Scan self-extracting archives.
                                       (archives that contain an executable extraction
                                                                                                          No (default value) — Do not scan self-extracting archives.
                                       module).

   ScanMailBases                       Enables scanning email databases of Microsoft                      Yes — Scan files of email databases.
                                       Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat, and other
                                                                                                          No (default value) — Do not scan files of email databases.
                                       mail clients.

   ScanPlainMail                       Enables scanning of plain text email messages.                     Yes — Scan plain text email messages.
                                                                                                          No (default value) — Do not scan plain text email messages.

   SkipPlainTextFiles                  Temporary exclusion of files in text format from                   Yes – Do not scan text files if they are reused by the same
                                       scans.                                                             process for 10 minutes after the most recent scan.
                                       If the value of this setting is                                    No (default value) – scan files in plain text format.
                                        SkipPlainTextFiles=Yes , the application
                                       does not scan text files if they are reused by the
                                       same process for 10 minutes after the most
                                       recent scan. This setting makes it possible to
                                       optimize scans of application logs.

   SizeLimit                           Maximum size of an object to be scanned (in                        0–999999
                                       megabytes). If the object to be scanned is larger
                                                                                                          0 — The application scans objects of any size.
                                       than the specified value, the application skips
                                       this object.                                                       Default value: 0.

   TimeLimit                           Maximum object scan duration (in seconds).                         0–9999
                                       The application stops scanning the object if it                    0 — The object scan time is unlimited.
                                       takes longer than the time specified by this                       Default value: 60.
                                       setting.




                                                                                    214
         Setting                           Description                                                   Values

FirstAction             Selection of the first action to be performed by     Disinfect — The application tries to disinfect an object
                        the application on the infected objects.             and save a copy of it to Backup. If disinfection fails (for
                                                                             example, if the type of object or the type of threat in the
                                                                             object cannot be disinfected), then the application leaves
                                                                             the object unchanged. If the first action is Disinfect , it is
                                                                             recommended to specify a second action using the
                                                                             SecondAction setting.
                                                                             Remove — The application removes the infected object
                                                                             after creating a backup copy of it.
                                                                              Recommended (perform recommended action) — The
                                                                             application automatically selects and performs an action on
                                                                             the object based on information about the threat detected
                                                                             in the object. For example, Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                                                                             immediately removes Trojans since they do not incorporate
                                                                             themselves into other files and therefore they do not need
                                                                             to be disinfected.
                                                                             Block – The application blocks access to an infected
                                                                             object. Information about the infected object is logged.
                                                                             Default value: Recommended .

SecondAction            Selection of the second action to be performed       The possible values of the SecondAction setting are the
                        by the application on the infected objects. The      same as those of the FirstAction setting.
                        application performs the second action if the
                                                                             If Block or Remove is selected as the first action, the
                        first action fails.
                                                                             second action does not need to be specified.
                                                                             It is recommended to specify two actions in all other cases.
                                                                             If you have not specified a second action, the application
                                                                             applies Block as the second action.
                                                                             Default value: Block .

UseExcludeMasks         Enables exclusion of the objects specified by the    Yes — Exclude objects specified by the
                        ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.           ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from scans.
                                                                             No (default value) — Do not exclude objects specified by the
                                                                             ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.

ExcludeMasks.item_#     Excludes objects from being scanned by name or       The default value is not defined.
                        mask.
                                                                                Example:
                        You can use this setting to exclude an individual       UseExcludeMasks=Yes
                        file from the specified scan scope by name or           ExcludeMasks.item_0000=eicar1.*
                                                                                ExcludeMasks.item_0001=eicar2.*
                        exclude several files at once using masks in the
                        shell format.


UseExcludeThreats       Enables exclusion of objects containing the          Yes — Exclude objects containing the threats specified by
                        threats specified by the ExcludeThreats              the ExcludeThreats.item_# setting from scans.
                        setting from scans.
                                                                             No (default value) — Do not exclude objects containing the
                                                                             threats specified by the ExcludeThreats.item_# setting
                                                                             from scans.

ExcludeThreats.item_#   Excludes objects from scans by the name of the       The setting value is case-sensitive.
                        threats detected in them. Before specifying a
                                                                             The default value is not defined.
                        value for this setting, make sure that the
                        UseExcludeThreats setting is enabled.                   Example:
                                                                                UseExcludeThreats=Yes
                        In order to exclude an object from scans, specify       ExcludeThreats.item_0000=EICAR-Test-*
                        the full name of the threat detected in this            ExcludeThreats.item_0001=?rojan.Linux
                        object – the string containing the application's
                        decision that the object is infected.
                        For example, you may be using a utility to obtain
                        information about your network. To keep the
                        application from blocking it, add the full name of
                        the threat contained in it to the list of threats
                        excluded from scans.
                        You can find the full name of the threat detected
                        in an object in the application log or on the
                        website https://threats.kaspersky.com .




                                                           215
           Setting                                    Description                                                  Values

ReportCleanObjects                Enables logging of information about scanned         Yes — Log information about non-infected objects.
                                  objects that the application reports as not being
                                                                                        No (default value) — Do not log information about non-
                                  infected.
                                                                                       infected objects.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make
                                  sure that a particular object was scanned by the
                                  application.

ReportPackedObjects               Enables logging of information about scanned         Yes — Log information about scanned objects within
                                  objects that are part of compound objects.           archives.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make    No (default value) — Do not log information about scanned
                                  sure that an object within an archive has been       objects within archives.
                                  scanned by the application.

ReportUnprocessedObjects          Enables logging of information about objects         Yes — Log information about unprocessed objects.
                                  that have not been processed for some reason.
                                                                                       No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                                                                       unprocessed objects.

UseAnalyzer                       Enables heuristic analysis.                          Yes (default value) — Enable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  Heuristic analysis helps the application to detect   No — Disable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  threats even before they become known to virus
                                  analysts.

HeuristicLevel                    Specifies the heuristic analysis level.              Light — The least thorough scan with minimum load on the
                                  The heuristic analysis level sets the balance        system.
                                  between the thoroughness of searches for              Medium — A medium heuristic analysis level with a balanced
                                  threats, the load on the operating system's          load on the system.
                                  resources, and the scan duration. The higher the
                                                                                       Deep — The most thorough scan with maximum load on the
                                  heuristic analysis level, the more resources and
                                                                                       system.
                                  time are required for scanning.
                                                                                       Recommended (default value) — The recommended value.

UseIChecker                       Enables usage of the iChecker technology.            Yes (default value) — Enable use of the iChecker
                                                                                       technology.
                                                                                       No — Disable use of the iChecker technology.

ScanByAccessType                  File Threat Protection task operation mode. The      SmartCheck (default value) — Scan a file on attempts to
                                  ScanByAccessType setting only applies to the         open it, and scan it again on attempts to close it if the file
                                  File Threat Protection task.                         has been modified. If a process accesses an object multiple
                                                                                       times in the course of its operation and modifies it,
                                                                                       the application scans the object again only when
                                                                                       the process closes it for the last time.
                                                                                       OpenAndModify — Scan a file on attempts to open it, and
                                                                                       scan it again on attempts to close it if the file has been
                                                                                       modified.
                                                                                       Open — Scan a file on attempts to open it for reading,
                                                                                       execution, or modification.

The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                          Description of the scan scope, which contains        Default value: All objects .
                                  additional information about the scan scope.
                                                                                          Example:
                                  The maximum length of the string specified using        AreaDesc=" Scanning of email databases "
                                  this setting is 4096 characters.


UseScanArea                       Enables scans of the specified scope. To run the     Yes (default value) — Scan the specified scope.
                                  task, enable scans of at least one scope.
                                                                                       No — Do not scan the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                   Scan scope limitation. With this scan scope, the     The default value is * (scan all objects).
                                  application only scans files that are specified
                                  using masks in the shell format.                        Example:
                                                                                          AreaMask_item_< item number >=*doc
                                  If this setting is not specified, the application
                                  scans all the objects in the scan scope.
                                  You can specify several values for this setting.




                                                                      216
       Setting                     Description                                            Values

Path             Path to the directory with objects to be   < path to local directory > — Scan objects in the
                 scanned.                                   specified directory. You can use masks and tags to specify
                                                            the path.


                                                              You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                                                                   [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                                   [container-name:< name >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                                   [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                                   [image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                              You can also use unique combinations of the [container-
                                                              id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                                                              [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:
                                                              < name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                                                              Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is
                                                              allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                                                              For example:

                                                                   [container-name:< name >][image-name:
                                                                   < name >]/< path to local directory >

                                                                   [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                                                                   < name >]/< path to local directory >

                                                                   [image-name:< name >][image-id:
                                                                   < identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                                                                   [container-name:< name >][container-id:
                                                                   < identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to
                                                                   local directory >

                                                                   [container-name:< name >][image-id:
                                                                   < identifier >][container-id:< identifier >]
                                                                   [image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                              You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and
                                                              identifiers.



                                                              You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                              directory name mask.

                                                              You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of
                                                              characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                              character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                              /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                              You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent
                                                              any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                                              character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                              /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                              The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                              example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                              You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                              character in the file or directory name.


                                                            Shared:NFS — Scan the device file system resources that
                                                            are accessible via the NFS protocol.
                                                            Shared:SMB – Scan the device file system resources that
                                                            are accessible via the Samba protocol.
                                                            Mounted:NFS – Scan the remote directories mounted on a
                                                            device using the NFS protocol.
                                                   217
           Setting                                  Description                                                  Values
                                                                                      Mounted:SMB – Scan the remote directories mounted on a
                                                                                      device using the Samba protocol.
                                                                                      AllRemoteMounted – Scan all remote directories mounted
                                                                                      on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                                                                      AllShared – Scan all the device file system resources that
                                                                                      are accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                                                                      < file system type > — Scan all the resources of the
                                                                                      specified device file system.

The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                         Description of the scan exclusion scope, which       The default value is not defined.
                                 contains additional information about the
                                 exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                      Excludes the specified scope from scans.             Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope.
                                                                                      No — Do not exclude the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                  Limitation of scan exclusion scope. In the           Default value: * (exclude all objects from scan)
                                 exclusion scope, the application excludes from
                                 scans only files that are specified using masks in
                                 the shell format.
                                 If this setting is not specified, the application
                                 does not scan any of the objects within the
                                 exclusion scope. You can specify several values
                                 for this setting.




                                                                    218
       Setting                     Description                                            Values

Path             Path to the directory with objects to be   < path to local directory > — Exclude objects in the
                 excluded.                                  specified directory (including subdirectories) from scans.
                                                            You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                                                              You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                                                                   [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                                   [container-name:< name >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                                   [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                                   [image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                              You can also use unique combinations of the [container-
                                                              id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                                                              [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:
                                                              < name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                                                              Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is
                                                              allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                                                              For example:

                                                                   [container-name:< name >][image-name:
                                                                   < name >]/< path to local directory >

                                                                   [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                                                                   < name >]/< path to local directory >

                                                                   [image-name:< name >][image-id:
                                                                   < identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                                                                   [container-name:< name >][container-id:
                                                                   < identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to
                                                                   local directory >

                                                                   [container-name:< name >][image-id:
                                                                   < identifier >][container-id:< identifier >]
                                                                   [image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                                                                   directory >

                                                              You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and
                                                              identifiers.



                                                              You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                              directory name mask.

                                                              You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of
                                                              characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                              character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                              /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                              You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent
                                                              any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                                              character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                              /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                              The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                              example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                              You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                              character in the file or directory name.


                                                            Mounted:NFS – Exclude the remote directories mounted on
                                                            a device using the NFS protocol from scan.
                                                            Mounted:SMB – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                            on a device using the Samba protocol from scan.




                                                   219
           Setting                                  Description                                                      Values
                                                                                       AllRemoteMounted – Exclude all remote directories
                                                                                       mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols
                                                                                       from scan.
                                                                                       < file system type > — Exclude all the resources of the
                                                                                       specified device file system from scans.

The [ExcludedForProgram.item_#] section contains the following settings:

ProgramPath                      Path to excluded process.                             < full path to process > – Do not scan the process in
                                                                                       the indicated local directory.

ApplyToDescendants               Exclude child processes of the excluded process       Yes – exclude the specified process and all its child
                                 specified by the ProgramPath setting from             processes from scans.
                                 scans.                                                No (default value) – exclude only the specified process from
                                                                                       scans, do not exclude its child processes from scans.

AreaDesc                         Description of the process exclusion scope.           Default value: All objects .

UseExcludedForProgram            Excludes the specified scope from scans.              Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope.
                                                                                       No — Do not exclude the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                  Limitation of the process exclusion scope. In the     Default value: * (exclude all objects from scan)
                                 process exclusion scope, the application
                                 excludes from scans only the files that are
                                 specified using masks in the shell format.
                                 If this setting is not specified, the application
                                 excludes from scans all the objects within the
                                 process exclusion scope. You can specify several
                                 values for this setting.

Path                             Path to a directory with files that are modified by   < path to local directory > — Exclude objects in the
                                 the process.                                          specified directory from scan. You can use masks to specify
                                                                                       the path.

                                                                                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                         directory name mask.

                                                                                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of
                                                                                         characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                                                         character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                         /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent
                                                                                         any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                                                                         character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                         /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                                                         example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                         character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                       Shared:NFS — Exclude device file system resources that
                                                                                       are accessible via the NFS protocol from scans.
                                                                                       Shared:SMB — Exclude device file system resources that
                                                                                       are accessible via the Samba protocol from scans.
                                                                                       Mounted:NFS – Exclude the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                       a device using the NFS protocol from scan.
                                                                                       Mounted:SMB – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                                       on a device using the Samba protocol from scan.
                                                                                       AllRemoteMounted – Exclude all remote directories
                                                                                       mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols
                                                                                       from scan.
                                                                                       AllShared – Exclude all device file system resources that
                                                                                       are accessible using the Samba and NFS protocols from
                                                                                       scan.
                                                                                       < file system type > — Exclude all the resources of the
                                                                                       specified device file system from scans.




                                                                    220
Optimizing network directory scanning
To optimize the File Threat Protection task, you can exclude from scans any files being copied from network
directories to the local directory. To do so, configure exclusion based on processes for the utility used for copying
from network directories (for example, for the cp utility).

To configure exclusion of network directories from scans:

 1. Output the File Threat Protection task settings (File_Threat_Protection, ID:1) to a configuration file using the
    following command:
   kesl-control --get-settings 1 --file < full path to configuration file > [--json]

 2. Open the configuration file and add the [ExcludedForProgram.item_ #] section with the following
    settings:

      ProgramPath – path to the process to be excluded or to the directory with the processes to be excluded.

      ApplyToDescendants is a parameter that indicates whether the scan should exclude child processes of
      the excluded process (possible values: Yes or No).

      AreaDesc – a description of the process exclusion scope, which contains additional information about the
      exclusion scope.

      UseExcludedForProgram enables exclusion of the specified scope during task operation (possible values:
      Yes or No).

      Path – path to the files or directory with files modified by the process.

      AreaMask.item_# is the file name mask for the files to be excluded from the scan. You can also specify the
      full path to the file.

     Example:
     [ExcludedForProgram.item_0000]
     ProgramPath=/usr/bin/cp
     ApplyToDescendants=No
     AreaDesc=
     UseExcludedForProgram=Yes
     Path=AllRemoteMounted
     AreaMask.item_0000=*



 3. Execute the command:
   kesl-control --set-settings 1 --file < full path to configuration file > [--json]
   Specify the --json option if you are importing settings from a configuration file in JSON format. If the option
   is not specified, the application will attempt to import settings from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
   displayed.

  The application does not scan the files in network directories, but the cp command itself (for the example given
  above) and local files are scanned.




                                                         221
Special considerations for scanning symbolic links and
hard links
Kaspersky Endpoint Security lets you scan symbolic links and hard links to files.


Scanning symbolic links

The application scans symbolic links only if the file referenced by the symbolic link is within the scan scope of the
File Threat Protection component.

If the file referenced by the symbolic link is not within the scan scope of the File Threat Protection component,
the application does not scan this file. However, if the file contains malicious code, the security of the device
is at risk.


Scanning hard links

When processing a file with more than one hard link, the application chooses an action depending on the specified
action on objects:

   If the Perform recommended action option is selected, the application automatically selects and performs an
   action on an object based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the object and the
   possibility of disinfecting it.

   If the Remove action is selected, the application removes the hard link being processed. The remaining hard
   links to this file will not be processed.

   If the Disinfect action is selected, the application disinfects the source file. If disinfection fails, the application
   deletes the hard link and creates in its place a copy of the source file with the name of the deleted hard link.

When you restore a file with a hard link from the Backup storage, the application creates a copy of the source file
with the name of the hard link that was moved to the Backup storage. Connections with the remaining hard links
to the source file will not be restored.




                                                          222
Malware Scan
Malware Scan is a one-time full or custom file scan on the device performed on demand. Kaspersky Endpoint
Security can carry out multiple Malware Scan tasks at the same time.

A Malware Scan (Scan_My_Computer) predefined task is created in the application. You can use this task to
perform a full scan of the device. During a full scan, the application scans all objects located on the device's local
drives, as well as all mounted and shared objects that are accessed via Samba or NFS protocols with the
recommended security settings.


  If the root user does not have access to a remote directory mounted on the device over the NFSv4 protocol,
  the application blocks access to such a file for all users.


In Kaspersky Security Center, the Kaspersky Security Center Initial Configuration Wizard automatically creates a
Malware Scan group task after installing the administration MMC plug-in or the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
administration web plug-in.


  During a full disk scan, the processor is busy. It is recommended to run the full scan task when the business is
  idle.


You can configure the settings of automatically created tasks in Kaspersky Security Center and in the command
line, and also create Malware Scan user tasks.

Upon detecting malware, Kaspersky Endpoint Security may remove the infected file and terminate the malware
process started from this file.

If during execution of the malware scan task the application was restarted by a control service or manually by the
user, the task will be stopped. The application logs the OnDemandTaskInterrupted event.

You can run Malware Scan tasks and configure scan settings:

   Select operating system objects to scan: files, archives, boot sectors, process memory and kernel memory,
   startup objects.

   Limit the size of an object to be scanned and the duration of the object scan.

   Select the actions to be performed by the application on the infected objects.

   Configure exclusions of objects from scans:

      by name or mask

      by the name of the threats detected in the objects


     When running on operating systems that use the special-purpose parsecfs file system (Astra Linux Special
     Edition) we recommend adding mounting paths of this file system to exclusions from scanning.


   Enable or disable global exclusions and File Threat Protection exclusions when scanning.


                                                         223
    Enable the logging of information about scanned non-infected objects, about scanning objects in archives, and
    about unprocessed objects.

    Configure the use of the heuristic analyzer and iChecker technology during a scan.

    Limit the set of devices whose boot sectors need to be scanned.

    Configure scan scopes and scan exclusion scopes.




Malware Scan in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can scan for malware using the Malware Scan task.

You can run an automatically created group task and also create and run user tasks for scanning. You can configure
scan settings by editing the settings of Malware Scan tasks.

Malware Scan task settings

           Setting                                                                     Description

  Scan archives               This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                              If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                              To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration of
                              archive scans by configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than (MB) settings
                              in the General scan settings section.
                              If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                              The check box is selected by default.

  Scan SFX archives           This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are the archives that contain
                              an executable extraction module.
                              If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                              If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                              This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                              The check box is selected by default.

  Scan mail databases         This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and other
                              mail applications.
                              If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                              If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                              This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan mail format files      This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                              If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                              If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                              This check box is cleared by default.

  Skip file that is scanned   In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application stops
  for longer than (sec)       scanning the file.
                              Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                              Default value: 0.

  Skip file larger than       In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
  (MB)
                              Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, the application scans files of any size.
                              Default value: 0.

  Log clean objects           This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                              If this check box is selected, the application logs events of the ObjectProcessed type for all scanned objects.
                              If this check box is cleared, the application does not log events of the ObjectProcessed type for any scanned object.
                              This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                         224
        Setting                                                                    Description

Log unprocessed            This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during a
objects                    scan.
                           If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                           If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                           This check box is cleared by default.

Log packed objects         This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                           detected.
                           If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                           If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                           This check box is cleared by default.

Use iChecker               This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
technology
                           If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                           If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                           The check box is selected by default.

Use heuristic analysis     This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                           The check box is selected by default.

Heuristic analysis level   If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                               Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                               Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                               Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                               Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                               combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.

First action               In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has
                           been detected:
                               Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                               Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                               Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                               file and about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                               Skip the object.

Second action              In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in
                           case the first action is unsuccessful:
                               Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                               Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                               Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                               file and about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                               Skip the object (default value).




                                                                     225
          Setting                                                                         Description

  Scan scopes           The table that contains the scopes scanned by the task. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes all
                        directories of the local file system.
                        You can add, configure, delete, move up, or move down scan scopes in the table.

                          Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                          Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If
                          you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory,
                          you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                          This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                          Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                          Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If
                          you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory,
                          you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                          This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                          Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

                          This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



                          Clicking the scan scope name opens the <Scan scope name> window. In this window, you can modify the settings of the
                          selected scan scope.



                          Clicking the Add button opens the <New scan scope> window. In this window, you can define a new scan scope.




Add scan scope window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scopes.

Scan scope settings

          Setting                                                                         Description

  Scope name            Field for entering the scan scope name. This name is displayed in the Scan scopes table in the Scan settings section.
                        The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope        This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                        If this check box is selected, the application processes this scan scope.
                        If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this scan scope. You can later include this scope in the
                        component settings by selecting the check box.
                        The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access   You can select the type of file system in the drop-down list:
  protocol, and path
                            Local (default value) – local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                            Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name
                            of the file system.
                            Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                            All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                            All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol       You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                            NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                            Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                            Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                        This drop-down list is available if the Shared or Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                       226
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Path                  This is the entry field for specifying the path to the directory that you want to include in the scan scope. You can use
                        masks and tags to specify the path.


                          You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                               [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                               [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                               [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                               [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                          You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                          id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                          Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                          For example:

                               [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                               [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                               [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                               [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                               directory >

                               [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                               < name >]/< path to local directory >

                          You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                          You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                          You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                          the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                          You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                          character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                          The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                          You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                        The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.
                        This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.
                        If the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, and the path is not specified, the application scans all
                        directories of the local file system.

  Name of shared        The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
  resource              scan scope are located.
                        The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                        in the Access protocol drop-down list.

  Masks                 The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                        By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                        You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Scan scopes section
You can configure scan scope settings for the Malware Scan task. The application allows you to scan files, boot
sectors, client device memory, and startup objects.



                                                                      227
Malware Scan scope task settings

                Setting                                                                       Description

   Scan files                              This check box enables or disables file scans.
                                           If the check box is selected, the application scans the files.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the files.
                                           The check box is selected by default.

   Scan boot sectors                       This check box enables or disables boot sector scans.
                                           If the check box is selected, the application scans the boot sectors.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the boot sectors.
                                           This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan kernel memory and running          This check box enables or disables client device memory scan.
   processes                               If the check box is selected, the application scans kernel memory and running processes.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan kernel memory and running processes.
                                           This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan startup objects                    This check box enables or disables startup object scans.
                                           If the check box is selected, the application scans startup objects.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan startup objects.
                                           This check box is cleared by default.

   Devices to scan                         Clicking the Configure device masks link opens the Scan scopes window, where you can specify the
                                           devices whose boot sectors will be scanned.




Scan scopes window
The table contains name masks of the devices, whose boot sectors the application must scan. By default, the
table contains the /** device name mask (all devices).

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.



Exclusion scopes section
In the Exclusion scopes section for the Malware Scan task, you can configure exclusion scopes, exclusions by mask
and threat name, as well as the use of global exclusions and File Threat Protection exclusions when the task is
running.

Settings of scan exclusions

            Setting                                                                      Description

   Configure exclusion             Clicking the Configure exclusion scopes link opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this window, you can define the
   scopes                          list of scan exclusions.

   Configure exclusions by         Clicking the Configure exclusions by mask link opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
   mask                            configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Configure exclusions by         Clicking the Configure exclusions by threat name link opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                     you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.

   Use global exclusions           The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the mount points specified in global exceptions while the
                                   application is running.
                                   If this check box is selected, the application excludes configured mount points from scans.
                                   The check box is selected by default.




                                                                           228
            Setting                                                                  Description

  Use File Threat              This check box enables or disables the use of configured File Threat Protection exclusions when the application is
  Protection exclusions        running.
                               If the check box is selected, the application does not scan the objects specified in the exclusions for the File Threat
                               Protection component.
                               The check box is selected by default.




Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                   Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name      Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                            The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope            This check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope when the application is running.
                            If the check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from scan or protection during its operation.
                            If the check box is cleared, the application includes this scope in scan or protection during its operation. You can later
                            exclude this scope from scan or protection by selecting the check box.
                            The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access       In this drop-down list, you can select the type of file system where the directories that you want to add to scan
  protocol, and path        exclusions are located:
                                 Local, for local directories.
                                 Mounted, for remote directories mounted on the device.
                                 All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

                                                                       229
        Setting                                                                 Description

Access protocol   You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                      NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                      Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                      Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                  This drop-down list is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

Path              Entry field for the path to the directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to
                  specify the path.


                    You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                         [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                    You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                    id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                    Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                    For example:

                         [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                         directory >

                         [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                         < name >]/< path to local directory >

                    You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                    You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                    You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                    the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                    You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                    character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                    The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                    To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                    The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                    mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                    You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                  The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.
                  This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

Name of shared    The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
resource          exclusion scope are located.
                  The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                  in the Access protocol drop-down list.

Masks             The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                  in the directory specified in the Path field.
                  By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                  You can add, edit, or delete masks.




                                                                230
Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
  to be excluded from a scan.




                                                                   231
Malware Scan in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can scan for malware using the Malware Scan task.

You can run an automatically created group task and also create and run user tasks for scanning. You can configure
scan settings by editing the settings of Malware Scan tasks.

In the Settings section of the properties of the Malware Scan task, you can configure the settings listed in the
table below.

Malware Scan task settings

         Setting                                                                      Description

  Scan                       This group of settings contains buttons that open windows where you can configure the scan scopes, scan scope settings,
                             and scan settings.

  Action on threat           This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Action on threat detection window,
  detection                  where you can configure the actions that the application performs on detected infected objects.


In the Exclusions section, you can configure exclusion scopes as well as exclusions by mask and by threat name in
the properties of the Malware Scan task.



Scan scopes window
The table contains the scan scopes. The application will scan files and directories located in the paths specified in
the table. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes all directories of the local file system.

Scan scope settings

     Setting                                   Description

  Scope name         Scan scope name.

  Path               Path to the directory that the application scans.

  Status             The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


  Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.



                                                                         232
  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scopes.

Scan scope settings

          Setting                                                                Description

  Scan scope name         Field for entering the scan scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                          The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope          This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                          If this check box is selected, the application processes this scan scope.
                          If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this scan scope. You can later include this scope in the
                          component settings by selecting the check box.
                          The check box is selected by default.




                                                                   233
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the scan scope.
protocol, and path
                      You can select the file system type in the drop-down list of file systems:
                          Local (default value) – local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                          Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name
                          of the file system.
                          Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                          All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Shared or Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in
                       the drop-down list on the right:
                            NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                            Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                            Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want to add to the scan scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.
                       If the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, and the path is not specified, the application
                       scans all directories of the local file system.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the scan scope are
                      located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   234
          Setting                                                                       Description

  Masks                        The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                               By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                               You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Scan scope settings window
In this window, you can configure the scan settings for the Malware Scan task. The application allows you to scan
files, boot sectors, device memory, and startup objects.

Scan scope settings

               Setting                                                                    Description

  Scan files                         This check box enables or disables file scans.
                                     If the check box is selected, the application scans the files.
                                     If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the files.
                                     The check box is selected by default.

  Scan boot sectors                  This check box enables or disables boot sector scans.
                                     If the check box is selected, the application scans the boot sectors.
                                     If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the boot sectors.
                                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan kernel memory and             This check box enables or disables device memory scan.
  running processes                  If the check box is selected, the application scans kernel memory and running processes.
                                     If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan kernel memory and running processes.
                                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan startup objects               This check box enables or disables startup object scans.
                                     If the check box is selected, the application scans startup objects.
                                     If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan startup objects.
                                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Devices to scan                    This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Scan scopes window,
                                     where you can specify the devices whose boot sectors must be scanned.

  Use global exclusions              The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the mount points specified in global exceptions while the
                                     application is running.
                                     If this check box is selected, the application excludes configured mount points from scans.
                                     The check box is selected by default.

  Use File Threat Protection         This check box enables or disables the use of configured File Threat Protection exclusions when the application
  exclusions                         is running.
                                     If the check box is selected, the application does not scan the objects specified in the exclusions for the File
                                     Threat Protection component.
                                     The check box is selected by default.




Scan scopes window
The table contains name masks of the devices, whose boot sectors the application must scan. By default, the
table contains the /** device name mask (all devices).

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.




                                                                          235
Scan settings window
In this window, you can configure the file scan settings for the task.

Scan settings

           Setting                                                                      Description

  Scan archives                This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                               To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration
                               of archive scans by configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than (MB)
                               settings in the General scan settings section.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan SFX archives            This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are the archives that
                               contain an executable extraction module.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                               This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan mail databases          This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and
                               other mail applications.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan mail format files       This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                               If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Skip file that is scanned    In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application
  for longer than (sec)        stops scanning the file.
                               Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                               Default value: 0.

  Skip file larger than (MB)   In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
                               Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, the application scans files of any size.
                               Default value: 0.

  Log clean objects            This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs events of the ObjectProcessed type for all scanned objects.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log events of the ObjectProcessed type for any scanned object.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Log unprocessed              This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during
  objects                      a scan.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Log packed objects           This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                               detected.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                               This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                         236
            Setting                                                                        Description

   Use iChecker                    This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
   technology                      If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                                   If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Use heuristic analysis          This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Heuristic analysis level        If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                       Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                       Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                       Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                       Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                       combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.




Action on threat detection window
In this window, you can configure actions to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security on detected infected
objects:

Actions on threat detection

     Setting                                                                        Description

   First action       In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has been
                      detected:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                          Skip the object.

   Second             In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in case the first
   action             action is unsuccessful:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                          Skip the object (default value).




Exclusions section
Scan exclusion is a set of conditions. When these conditions are met, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan
the objects for viruses and other malware. You can also exclude objects from scans by masks and threat names.

Settings of scan exclusions

    Group of settings                                                                   Description

   Exclusion scopes           This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this
                              window, you can define the list of scopes to be excluded from scans.

   Exclusions by mask         This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
                              configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Exclusions by              This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.




                                                                            237
Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                    Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name       Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                             The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope             The check box enables or disables exclusion of the scope from scan when the application is running.
                             If this check box is selected, the application excludes this area during scans.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application includes this area in the scan scope. You can later exclude this scope by
                             selecting the check box.
                             The check box is selected by default.




                                                                       238
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the exclusion scope.
protocol, and path    In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system of the directories to be excluded from
                      scans:
                          Local, for local directories.
                          Mounted – mounted directories.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in the drop-
                       down list on the right:
                           NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                           Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                           Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                         The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                         mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the exclusion scope
                      are located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   239
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Masks                      The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                             in the directory specified in the path field.
                             By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                             You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



                                                                        240
  Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
  to be excluded from a scan.




Malware Scan in the command line
On the command line, you can scan for malware in the following ways:

    Using the Malware Scan predefined task (Scan_My_Computer). You can manually start, stop, pause, or resume
    this task and configure the task run schedule. You can configure scan settings by editing the settings of this
    task.

    Using Malware Scan user tasks (tasks of the ODS type). You can manually start, stop, pause, or resume user
    tasks and configure the task schedule.

Using the command kesl-control --scan-file, you can perform a custom scan of the specified files and
directories.




Settings of the Malware Scan predefined task
The table describes all available values and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Malware Scan task.

Malware Scan task settings

               Setting                                Description                                                          Values

   ScanFiles                  Enables file scan.                                                 Yes (default value) — Scan files.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan files.

   ScanBootSectors            Enables boot sector scans.                                         Yes (default value) — Scan boot sectors.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan boot sectors.

   ScanComputerMemory         Enables process memory and kernel memory                           Yes (default value) — Scan process memory and kernel
                              scans.                                                             memory.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan process memory and kernel memory.

   ScanStartupObjects         Enables startup object scans.                                      Yes (default value) — Scan startup objects.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan startup objects.

   ScanArchived               Enables scanning of archives (including SFX self-                  Yes (default value) — Scan archives. If the
                              extracting archives).                                              FirstAction=Recommended value is specified, then,
                              The application scans the following archives: .zip;                depending on the archive type, the application deletes
                              .7z*; .7-z; .rar; .iso; .cab; .jar; .bz; .bz2; .tbz; .tbz2; .gz;   either the infected object or the entire archive that
                              .tgz; .arj. The list of supported archive formats                  contains the threat.
                              depends on the application databases being used.                   No — Do not scan archives.

   ScanSfxArchived            Enables scanning of self-extracting archives only                  Yes (default value) — Scan self-extracting archives.
                              (archives that contain an executable extraction
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan self-extracting archives.
                              module).

   ScanMailBases              Enables scanning email databases of Microsoft                      Yes — Scan files of email databases.
                              Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat, and other mail
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan files of email databases.
                              clients.

   ScanPlainMail              Enables scanning of plain text email messages.                     Yes — Scan plain text email messages.
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan plain text email
                                                                                                 messages.



                                                                         241
            Setting                       Description                                                  Values

SizeLimit             Maximum size of an object to be scanned (in            0–999999
                      megabytes). If the object to be scanned is larger
                                                                             0 — The application scans objects of any size.
                      than the specified value, the application skips this
                      object.                                                Default value: 0.

TimeLimit             Maximum object scan duration (in seconds). The         0–9999
                      application stops scanning the object if it takes      0 — The object scan time is unlimited.
                      longer than the time specified by this setting.
                                                                             Default value: 0.

FirstAction           Selection of the first action to be performed by        Disinfect — The application tries to disinfect an object
                      the application on the infected objects.               and save a copy of it to Backup. If disinfection fails (for
                                                                             example, if the type of object or the type of threat in the
                                                                             object cannot be disinfected), then the application leaves
                                                                             the object unchanged. If the first action is Disinfect , it
                                                                             is recommended to specify a second action using the
                                                                              SecondAction setting.
                                                                             Remove — The application removes the infected object
                                                                             after creating a backup copy of it.
                                                                             Recommended (perform recommended action) — The
                                                                             application automatically selects and performs an action
                                                                             on the object based on information about the threat
                                                                             detected in the object. For example, Kaspersky Endpoint
                                                                             Security immediately removes Trojans since they
                                                                             do not incorporate themselves into other files and
                                                                             therefore they do not need to be disinfected.
                                                                              Skip — The application does not try to disinfect or delete
                                                                             infected objects. Information about the infected object
                                                                             is logged.
                                                                             Default value: Recommended .

SecondAction          Selection of the second action to be performed         The possible values of the SecondAction setting are the
                      by the application on the infected objects. The        same as those of the FirstAction setting.
                      application performs the second action if the first
                                                                             If Skip or Remove is selected as the first action, the
                      action fails.
                                                                             second action does not need to be specified.
                                                                             It is recommended to specify two actions in all
                                                                             other cases. If you have not specified the second action,
                                                                             the application applies Skip as the second action.
                                                                             Default value: Skip .

UseExcludeMasks       Enables exclusion of the objects specified by the      Yes — Exclude objects specified by the
                      ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.             ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from scans.
                                                                             No (default value) — Do not exclude objects specified by
                                                                             the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.

ExcludeMasks.item_#   Excludes objects from being scanned by name or         The default value is not defined.
                      mask. You can use this setting to exclude an
                                                                                Example:
                      individual file from the specified scan scope by          UseExcludeMasks=Yes
                      name or exclude several files at once using masks         ExcludeMasks.item_0000=eicar1.*
                      in the shell format.                                      ExcludeMasks.item_0001=eicar2.*

                      Before specifying a value for this setting, make
                      sure that the UseExcludeMasks setting is
                      enabled.

UseExcludeThreats     Enables exclusion of objects containing the            Yes — Exclude objects containing the threats specified by
                      threats specified by the ExcludeThreats setting        the ExcludeThreats.item_# setting from scans.
                      from scans.
                                                                             No (default value) — Do not exclude objects containing
                                                                             the threats specified by the ExcludeThreats.item_#
                                                                             setting from scans.




                                                         242
           Setting                                     Description                                                   Values

ExcludeThreats.item_#             Excludes objects from scans by the name of the           The setting value is case-sensitive.
                                  threats detected in them. Before specifying a            The default value is not defined.
                                  value for this setting, make sure that the
                                  UseExcludeThreats setting is enabled.                       Example:
                                                                                              UseExcludeThreats=Yes
                                  In order to exclude an object from scans, specify           ExcludeThreats.item_0000=EICAR-Test-*
                                  the full name of the threat detected in this object         ExcludeThreats.item_0001=?rojan.Linux
                                  – the string containing the application's decision
                                  that the object is infected.
                                  For example, you may be using a utility to obtain
                                  information about your network. To keep the
                                  application from blocking it, add the full name of
                                  the threat contained in it to the list of threats
                                  excluded from scans.
                                  You can find the full name of the threat detected
                                  in an object in the application log or on the website
                                  https://threats.kaspersky.com .

UseGlobalExclusions               Enables global exclusions for scanning.                  Yes (default value) — Use the global exclusions.
                                                                                           No — Do not use global exclusions.

UseOASExclusions                  Enables File Threat Protection exclusions for            Yes (default value) — Use File Threat Protection
                                  scanning.                                                exclusions.
                                                                                           No — do not use File Threat Protection exclusions.

ReportCleanObjects                Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about non-infected objects.
                                  objects that the application reports as not being
                                                                                            No (default value) — Do not log information about non-
                                  infected.
                                                                                           infected objects.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make
                                  sure that a particular object was scanned by the
                                  application.

ReportPackedObjects               Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about scanned objects within
                                  objects that are part of compound objects.               archives.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make        No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                  sure that an object within an archive has been           scanned objects within archives.
                                  scanned by the application.

ReportUnprocessedObjects          Enables logging of information about objects that        Yes — Log information about unprocessed objects.
                                  have not been processed for some reason.
                                                                                           No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                                                                           unprocessed objects.

UseAnalyzer                       Enables heuristic analysis.                              Yes (default value) — Enable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  Heuristic analysis helps the application to detect       No — Disable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  threats even before they become known to virus
                                  analysts.

HeuristicLevel                    Specifies the heuristic analysis level.                  Light — The least thorough scan with minimum load on
                                  You can specify the heuristic analysis level. The        the system.
                                  heuristic analysis level sets the balance between        Medium — A medium heuristic analysis level with a
                                  the thoroughness of searches for threats, the load       balanced load on the system.
                                  on the operating system's resources, and the scan
                                                                                           Deep — The most thorough scan with maximum load on
                                  duration. The higher the heuristic analysis level, the
                                                                                           the system.
                                  more resources and time are required for
                                  scanning.                                                Recommended (default value) — The recommended value.

UseIChecker                       Enables usage of the iChecker technology.                Yes (default value) — Enable use of the iChecker
                                                                                           technology.
                                                                                           No — Disable use of the iChecker technology.

DeviceNameMasks.item_#            List of device names. The application will scan          AllObjects – scan boot sectors of all devices.
                                  boot sectors of these devices.
                                                                                           < device name mask > – Scan boot sectors of the
                                  The setting value cannot be empty. At least one          devices whose names match the specified mask.
                                  device name mask must be specified to run this
                                                                                           Default value: /** – any set of characters in the device
                                  task.
                                                                                           name, including the / character.

The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:




                                                                      243
           Setting                                   Description                                                   Values

AreaDesc                         Description of the scan scope, which contains          Default value: All objects .
                                 additional information about the scan scope.
                                 The maximum length of the string specified using          Example:
                                                                                           AreaDesc=" Mail bases scan "
                                 this setting is 4096 characters.



UseScanArea                      Enables scans of the specified scope. To run the       Yes (default value) — Scan the specified scope.
                                 task, enable scans of at least one scope.
                                                                                        No — Do not scan the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                  Scan scope limitation. Within the scan scope, the      The default value is * (scan all objects).
                                 application scans only the files that are specified
                                 using the masks in the shell format.                      Example:
                                                                                           AreaMask.item_< item number >=*doc
                                 If this setting is not specified, the application
                                 scans all the objects in the scan scope.
                                 You can specify several values for this setting.

Path                             Path to the directory with objects to be scanned.      < path to local directory > — Scan objects in the
                                                                                        specified directory.
                                                                                        Shared:NFS — Scan the device file system resources
                                                                                        that are accessible via the NFS protocol.
                                                                                        Shared:SMB – Scan the device file system resources that
                                                                                        are accessible via the Samba protocol.
                                                                                        Mounted:NFS – Scan the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                        a device using the NFS protocol.
                                                                                        Mounted:SMB – Scan the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                        a device using the Samba protocol.
                                                                                        AllRemoteMounted – Scan all remote directories
                                                                                        mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                                        protocols.
                                                                                        AllShared – Scan all the device file system resources
                                                                                        that are accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                                                                        < file system type > — Scan all the resources of the
                                                                                        specified device file system.

The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                         Description of the scan exclusion scope, which         The default value is not defined.
                                 contains additional information about the
                                 exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                      Excludes the specified scope from scans.               Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope.
                                                                                        No — Do not exclude the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                  Limitation of scan exclusion scope. In the exclusion   Default value: * (exclude all objects)
                                 scope, the application excludes only the files that
                                 are specified using masks in the shell format.
                                 If this setting is not specified, the application
                                 excludes all the objects in the exclusion scope.
                                 You can specify several values for this setting.




                                                                     244
           Setting                              Description                                                    Values

  Path                       Path to the directory with objects to be excluded.   < path to local directory > — Exclude objects in the
                                                                                  specified directory (including subdirectories) from scans.
                                                                                  You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                                    You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                    directory name mask.

                                                                                    You can indicate a single * character to represent any set
                                                                                    of characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                                                    character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                    /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                    You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                    represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
                                                                                    the / character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                    /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                    The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                                                    example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                    You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                    character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                  In order to optimize the operation of scan tasks, it is
                                                                                  recommended to add the path with snapshots mounted
                                                                                  by the system in the read-only mode to the exclusions for
                                                                                  the systems with the btrfs file system and enabled active
                                                                                  snapshots. For example, for the systems based on
                                                                                  SUSE/OpenSUSE, you can add the following exclusion
                                                                                   /.snapshots/*/snapshot/ .
                                                                                  Mounted:NFS – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                                  on a device using the NFS protocol from scan.
                                                                                  Mounted:SMB – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                                  on a device using the Samba protocol from scan.
                                                                                  AllRemoteMounted – Exclude all remote directories
                                                                                  mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                                  protocols from scan.
                                                                                  < file system type > — Exclude all the resources of
                                                                                  the specified device file system from scans.



                                                                                     Remote directories are excluded from scanning by
                                                                                     the application only if they were mounted before
                                                                                     the task was started. Remote directories mounted
                                                                                     after the task is started are not excluded from
                                                                                     scanning.




Custom Scan of files and directories on the command line
You can perform a custom scan of the specified files and directories using the command kesl-control --scan-
file.

A custom scan is performed with the settings stored in the predefined task Scan_File (ID: 3). You can configure
settings for a custom scan of files by editing the settings of this task (see the table below).

To start a custom scan of the specified files and directories, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --scan-file < path > [--action < action >]




                                                               245
where:
    < path > is the path to the file or directory that you want to scan. You can specify multiple paths by separating
    them with a space.

    --action < action > is the action to be performed by the application on the infected objects. Possible
    values: Disinfect, Removed, Recommended, Skip. If you do not specify the --action option, the
    application performs the Recommended action.

As a result of executing the command, a temporary file scan task is created, which is automatically deleted after
completion. In this case, the scan results are output to the console.

The table describes all available values and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Scan_File task.


   The [ScanScope.item_ #] and [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_ #] sections defined in the Scan_File
   task are not taken into account when performing the custom scan.


Scan_File task settings

               Setting                                Description                                                          Values

   ScanFiles                  Enables file scan.                                                 Yes (default value) — Scan files.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan files.

   ScanBootSectors            Enables boot sector scans.                                         Yes — Scan boot sectors.
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan boot sectors.

   ScanComputerMemory         Enables process memory and kernel memory                           Yes — Scan process memory and kernel memory.
                              scans.
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan process memory and
                                                                                                 kernel memory.

   ScanStartupObjects         Enables startup object scans.                                      Yes — Scan startup objects.
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan startup objects.

   ScanArchived               Enables scanning of archives (including SFX self-                  Yes (default value) — Scan archives. If the
                              extracting archives).                                              FirstAction=Recommended value is specified, then,
                              The application scans the following archives: .zip;                depending on the archive type, the application deletes
                              .7z*; .7-z; .rar; .iso; .cab; .jar; .bz; .bz2; .tbz; .tbz2; .gz;   either the infected object or the entire archive that
                              .tgz; .arj. The list of supported archive formats                  contains the threat.
                              depends on the application databases being used.                   No — Do not scan archives.

   ScanSfxArchived            Enables scanning of self-extracting archives only                  Yes (default value) — Scan self-extracting archives.
                              (archives that contain an executable extraction
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan self-extracting archives.
                              module).

   ScanMailBases              Enables scanning email databases of Microsoft                      Yes — Scan files of email databases.
                              Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and other mail
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan files of email databases.
                              clients.

   ScanPlainMail              Enables scanning of plain text email messages.                     Yes — Scan plain text email messages.
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Do not scan plain text email
                                                                                                 messages.

   SizeLimit                  Maximum size of an object to be scanned (in                        0–999999
                              megabytes). If the object to be scanned is larger
                                                                                                 0 — The application scans objects of any size.
                              than the specified value, the application skips this
                              object.                                                            Default value: 0.

   TimeLimit                  Maximum object scan duration (in seconds). The                     0–9999
                              application stops scanning the object if it takes                  0 — The object scan time is unlimited.
                              longer than the time specified by this setting.
                                                                                                 Default value: 0.




                                                                         246
         Setting                            Description                                                   Values

FirstAction             Selection of the first action to be performed by         Disinfect — The application tries to disinfect an object
                        the application on the infected objects.                and save a copy of it to Backup. If disinfection fails (for
                                                                                example, if the type of object or the type of threat in the
                                                                                object cannot be disinfected), then the application leaves
                                                                                the object unchanged. If the first action is Disinfect , it
                                                                                is recommended to specify a second action using the
                                                                                 SecondAction setting.
                                                                                Remove — The application removes the infected object
                                                                                after creating a backup copy of it.
                                                                                Recommended (perform recommended action) — The
                                                                                application automatically selects and performs an action
                                                                                on the object based on information about the threat
                                                                                detected in the object. For example, Kaspersky Endpoint
                                                                                Security immediately removes Trojans since they
                                                                                do not incorporate themselves into other files and
                                                                                therefore they do not need to be disinfected.
                                                                                 Skip — The application does not try to disinfect or delete
                                                                                infected objects. Information about the infected object
                                                                                is logged.
                                                                                Default value: Recommended .

SecondAction            Selection of the second action to be performed          The possible values of the SecondAction setting are the
                        by the application on the infected objects. The         same as those of the FirstAction setting.
                        application performs the second action if the first
                                                                                If Skip or Remove is selected as the first action, the
                        action fails.
                                                                                second action does not need to be specified.
                                                                                It is recommended to specify two actions in all
                                                                                other cases. If you have not specified the second action,
                                                                                the application applies Skip as the second action.
                                                                                Default value: Skip .

UseExcludeMasks         Enables exclusion of the objects specified by the       Yes — Exclude objects specified by the
                        ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.              ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from scans.
                                                                                No (default value) — Do not exclude objects specified by
                                                                                the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.

ExcludeMasks.item_#     Excludes objects from being scanned by name or          The default value is not defined.
                        mask. You can use this setting to exclude an
                                                                                   Example:
                        individual file from the specified scan scope by
                                                                                   UseExcludeMasks=Yes
                        name or exclude several files at once using masks          ExcludeMasks.item_0000=eicar1.*
                        in the shell format.                                       ExcludeMasks.item_0001=eicar2.*




UseExcludeThreats       Enables exclusion of objects containing the             Yes — Exclude objects containing the threats specified by
                        threats specified by the ExcludeThreats setting         the ExcludeThreats.item_# setting from scans.
                        from scans.
                                                                                No (default value) — Do not exclude objects containing
                                                                                the threats specified by the ExcludeThreats.item_#
                                                                                setting from scans.

ExcludeThreats.item_#   Excludes objects from scans by the name of the          The setting value is case-sensitive.
                        threats detected in them. Before specifying a
                                                                                The default value is not defined.
                        value for this setting, make sure that the
                        UseExcludeThreats setting is enabled.                      Example:
                                                                                   UseExcludeThreats=Yes
                        In order to exclude an object from scans, specify          ExcludeThreats.item_0000=EICAR-Test-*
                        the full name of the threat detected in this object        ExcludeThreats.item_0001=?rojan.Linux
                        – the string containing the application's decision
                        that the object is infected.
                        For example, you may be using a utility to obtain
                        information about your network. To keep the
                        application from blocking it, add the full name of
                        the threat contained in it to the list of threats
                        excluded from scans.
                        You can find the full name of the threat detected
                        in an object in the application log or on the website
                        https://threats.kaspersky.com .

UseGlobalExclusions     Enables global exclusions for scanning.                 Yes (default value) — Use the global exclusions.
                                                                                No — Do not use global exclusions.




                                                           247
           Setting                                     Description                                                    Values

UseOASExclusions                  Enables File Threat Protection exclusions for            Yes (default value) — Use File Threat Protection
                                  scanning.                                                exclusions.
                                                                                           No — do not use File Threat Protection exclusions.

ReportCleanObjects                Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about non-infected objects.
                                  objects that the application reports as not being
                                                                                            No (default value) — Do not log information about non-
                                  infected.
                                                                                           infected objects.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make
                                  sure that a particular object was scanned by the
                                  application.

ReportPackedObjects               Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about scanned objects within
                                  objects that are part of compound objects.               archives.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make        No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                  sure that an object within an archive has been           scanned objects within archives.
                                  scanned by the application.

ReportUnprocessedObjects          Enables logging of information about objects that        Yes — Log information about unprocessed objects.
                                  have not been processed for some reason.
                                                                                           No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                                                                           unprocessed objects.

UseAnalyzer                       Enables heuristic analysis.                              Yes (default value) — Enable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  Heuristic analysis helps the application to detect       No — Disable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  threats even before they become known to virus
                                  analysts.

HeuristicLevel                    Specifies the heuristic analysis level.                  Light — The least thorough scan with minimum load on
                                  You can specify the heuristic analysis level. The        the system.
                                  heuristic analysis level sets the balance between        Medium — A medium heuristic analysis level with a
                                  the thoroughness of searches for threats, the load       balanced load on the system.
                                  on the operating system's resources, and the scan
                                                                                           Deep — The most thorough scan with maximum load on
                                  duration. The higher the heuristic analysis level, the
                                                                                           the system.
                                  more resources and time are required for
                                  scanning.                                                Recommended (default value) — The recommended value.

UseIChecker                       Enables usage of the iChecker technology.                Yes (default value) — Enable use of the iChecker
                                                                                           technology.
                                                                                           No — Disable use of the iChecker technology.

DeviceNameMasks.item_#            List of device names. The application will scan          AllObjects – scan boot sectors of all devices.
                                  boot sectors of these devices.
                                                                                           < device name mask > – Scan boot sectors of the
                                  The setting value cannot be empty. At least one          devices whose names match the specified mask.
                                  device name mask must be specified to run this
                                                                                           Default value: /** – any set of characters in the device
                                  task.
                                                                                           name, including the / character.

The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                          Description of the scan scope, which contains            Default value: All objects .
                                  additional information about the scan scope.
                                  The maximum length of the string specified using            Example:
                                                                                              AreaDesc=" Scanning of email databases "
                                  this setting is 4096 characters.



UseScanArea                       Enables scans of the specified scope. To run the         Yes (default value) — Scan the specified scope.
                                  task, enable scans of at least one scope.
                                                                                           No — Do not scan the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                   Scan scope limitation. Within the scan scope, the        The default value is * (scan all objects).
                                  application scans only the files that are specified
                                  using the masks in the shell format.                        Example:
                                                                                              AreaMask.item_< item number >=*doc
                                  If this setting is not specified, the application
                                  scans all the objects in the scan scope.
                                  You can specify several values for this setting.




                                                                      248
           Setting                                   Description                                                   Values

Path                             Path to the directory with objects to be scanned.      < path to local directory > — Scan objects in the
                                                                                        specified directory.
                                                                                        Shared:NFS — Scan the device file system resources
                                                                                        that are accessible via the NFS protocol.
                                                                                        Shared:SMB – Scan the device file system resources that
                                                                                        are accessible via the Samba protocol.
                                                                                        Mounted:NFS – Scan the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                        a device using the NFS protocol.
                                                                                        Mounted:SMB – Scan the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                        a device using the Samba protocol.
                                                                                        AllRemoteMounted – Scan all remote directories
                                                                                        mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                                        protocols.
                                                                                        AllShared – Scan all the device file system resources
                                                                                        that are accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                                                                        < file system type > — Scan all the resources of the
                                                                                        specified device file system.

The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                         Description of the scan exclusion scope, which         The default value is not defined.
                                 contains additional information about the
                                 exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                      Excludes the specified scope from scans.               Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope.
                                                                                        No — Do not exclude the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                  Limitation of scan exclusion scope. In the exclusion   Default value: * (exclude all objects)
                                 scope, the application excludes only the files that
                                 are specified using masks in the shell format.
                                 If this setting is not specified, the application
                                 excludes all the objects in the exclusion scope.
                                 You can specify several values for this setting.




                                                                     249
       Setting                      Description                                                    Values

Path             Path to the directory with objects to be excluded.   < path to local directory > — Exclude objects in the
                                                                      specified directory (including subdirectories) from scans.
                                                                      You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                        You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                        directory name mask.

                                                                        You can indicate a single * character to represent any set
                                                                        of characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                                        character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                        /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                        You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                        represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
                                                                        the / character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                        /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                        The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                                        example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                        You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                        character in the file or directory name.


                                                                      In order to optimize the operation of scan tasks, it is
                                                                      recommended to add the path with snapshots mounted
                                                                      by the system in the read-only mode to the exclusions for
                                                                      the systems with the btrfs file system and enabled active
                                                                      snapshots. For example, for the systems based on
                                                                      SUSE/OpenSUSE, you can add the following exclusion
                                                                       /.snapshots/*/snapshot/ .
                                                                      Mounted:NFS – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                      on a device using the NFS protocol from scan.
                                                                      Mounted:SMB – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                      on a device using the Samba protocol from scan.
                                                                      AllRemoteMounted – Exclude all remote directories
                                                                      mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                      protocols from scan.
                                                                      < file system type > — Exclude all the resources of
                                                                      the specified device file system from scans.



                                                                         Remote directories are excluded from scanning by
                                                                         the application only if they were mounted before
                                                                         the task was started. Remote directories mounted
                                                                         after the task is started are not excluded from
                                                                         scanning.




                                                   250
Critical Areas Scan
When performing a critical areas scan, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can scan boot sectors, startup objects,
process memory, and kernel memory.

Upon detecting malware, the application can remove the infected file and terminate the malware process started
from this file.


  If the root user does not have access to a remote directory mounted on the device over the NFSv4 protocol,
  the application blocks access to such a file for all users.


You can start a critical areas scan and configure the settings of the scan:

   Select the operating system objects to be scanned. Scanning of boot sectors, process memory and kernel
   memory, startup objects and archives is enabled by default. By default, files are not scanned during the critical
   areas scan.

   Limit the size of an object to be scanned and the duration of the object scan.

   Select the actions to be performed by the application on the infected objects.

   Configure exclusions of objects from scans:

      by name or mask

      by the name of the threats detected in the objects


     When running on operating systems that use the special-purpose parsecfs file system (Astra Linux Special
     Edition) we recommend adding mounting paths of this file system to exclusions from scanning.


   Enable or disable global exclusions and File Threat Protection exclusions when scanning.

   Enable the logging of information about scanned non-infected objects, about scanning objects in archives, and
   about unprocessed objects.

   Configure the use of the heuristic analyzer and iChecker technology during a scan.

   Limit the set of devices whose boot sectors need to be scanned.

   Configure scan scopes and scan exclusion scopes.




Critical Areas Scan in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can perform a critical areas scan of the operating system of a protected device using the
Critical Areas Scan task.

You can create and run critical areas scan user tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the settings of
the tasks.

                                                        251
Critical Areas Scan task settings

            Setting                                                                      Description

   Scan archives                This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                                If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                                To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration of
                                archive scans by configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than (MB) settings
                                in the General scan settings section.
                                If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                                The check box is selected by default.

   Scan SFX archives            This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are the archives that contain
                                an executable extraction module.
                                If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                                If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                                This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                                The check box is selected by default.

   Scan mail databases          This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and other
                                mail applications.
                                If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                                If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                                This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan mail format files       This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                                If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                                If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                                This check box is cleared by default.

   Skip file that is scanned    In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application stops
   for longer than (sec)        scanning the file.
                                Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                                Default value: 0.

   Skip file larger than        In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
   (MB)                         Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, the application scans files of any size.
                                Default value: 0.

   Log clean objects            This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                                If this check box is selected, the application logs events of the ObjectProcessed type for all scanned objects.
                                If this check box is cleared, the application does not log events of the ObjectProcessed type for any scanned object.
                                This check box is cleared by default.

   Notify about                 This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during a
   unprocessed files            scan.
                                If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                                If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                                This check box is cleared by default.

   Log packed objects           This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                                detected.
                                If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                                If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                                This check box is cleared by default.

   Use iChecker                 This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
   technology
                                If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                                If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                                The check box is selected by default.

   Use heuristic analysis       This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                                The check box is selected by default.




                                                                           252
          Setting                                                                              Description

  Heuristic analysis level   If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                 Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                 Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                 Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                 Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                 combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.

  First action               In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has
                             been detected:
                                 Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                                 file and about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                                 Skip the object.

  Second action              In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in
                             case the first action is unsuccessful:
                                 Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                                 file and about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                                 Skip the object (default value).

  Scan scopes                The table that contains the scopes scanned by the task. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes all
                             directories of the local file system.
                             You can add, configure, delete, move up, or move down scan scopes in the table.

                               Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                               Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If
                               you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory,
                               you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                               This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                               Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                               Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If
                               you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory,
                               you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                               This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                               Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

                               This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



                               Clicking the scan scope name opens the <Scan scope name> window. In this window, you can modify the settings of the
                               selected scan scope.



                               Clicking the Add button opens the <New scan scope> window. In this window, you can define a new scan scope.




Add scan scope window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scopes.




                                                                            253
Scan scope settings

          Setting                                                               Description

  Scope name            Field for entering the scan scope name. This name is displayed in the Scan scopes table in the Scan settings section.
                        The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope        This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                        If this check box is selected, the application processes this scan scope.
                        If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this scan scope. You can later include this scope in the
                        component settings by selecting the check box.
                        The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access   You can select the type of file system in the drop-down list:
  protocol, and path
                            Local (default value) – local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                            Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name
                            of the file system.
                            Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                            All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                            All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol       You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                            NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                            Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                            Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                        This drop-down list is available if the Shared or Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                   254
        Setting                                                                 Description

Path              This is the entry field for specifying the path to the directory that you want to include in the scan scope. You can use
                  masks and tags to specify the path.


                    You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                         [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                    You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                    id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                    Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                    For example:

                         [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                         directory >

                         [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                         < name >]/< path to local directory >

                    You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                    You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                    You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                    the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                    You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                    character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                    The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                    You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                  The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.
                  This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.
                  If the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, and the path is not specified, the application scans all
                  directories of the local file system.

Name of shared    The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
resource          scan scope are located.
                  The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                  in the Access protocol drop-down list.

Masks             The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                  By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                  You can add, edit, or delete masks.




                                                                255
Scan scopes section
Scan scope settings for the Critical area scan task

                 Setting                                                                      Description

   Scan files                              This check box enables or disables file scans.
                                           If the check box is selected, the application scans the files.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the files.
                                           This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan boot sectors                       This check box enables or disables boot sector scans.
                                           If the check box is selected, the application scans the boot sectors.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the boot sectors.
                                           The check box is selected by default.

   Scan kernel memory and running          This check box enables or disables client device memory scan.
   processes                               If the check box is selected, the application scans kernel memory and running processes.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan kernel memory and running processes.
                                           The check box is selected by default.

   Scan startup objects                    This check box enables or disables startup object scans.
                                           If the check box is selected, the application scans startup objects.
                                           If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan startup objects.
                                           The check box is selected by default.

   Devices to scan                         Clicking the Configure device masks link opens the Scan scopes window, where you can specify the
                                           devices whose boot sectors will be scanned.




Scan scopes window
The table contains name masks of the devices, whose boot sectors the application must scan. By default, the
table contains the /** device name mask (all devices).

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.



Exclusion scopes section
In the Exclusion scopes section for the Critical Areas Scan task, you can configure exclusion scopes, exclusions by
mask and by threat name, as well as the use of global exclusions and File Threat Protection exclusions when the
task is running.

Settings of scan exclusions

            Setting                                                                      Description

   Configure exclusion            Clicking the Configure exclusion scopes link opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this window, you can define the
   scopes                         list of scan exclusions.

   Configure exclusions by        Clicking the Configure exclusions by mask link opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
   mask                           configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Configure exclusions by        Clicking the Configure exclusions by threat name link opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                    you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.




                                                                          256
            Setting                                                                  Description

  Use global exclusions        The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the mount points specified in global exceptions while the
                               application is running.
                               If this check box is selected, the application excludes configured mount points from scans.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Use File Threat              This check box enables or disables the use of configured File Threat Protection exclusions when the application is
  Protection exclusions        running.
                               If the check box is selected, the application does not scan the objects specified in the exclusions for the File Threat
                               Protection component.
                               The check box is selected by default.




Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                   Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name      Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                            The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope            This check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope when the application is running.
                            If the check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from scan or protection during its operation.
                            If the check box is cleared, the application includes this scope in scan or protection during its operation. You can later
                            exclude this scope from scan or protection by selecting the check box.
                            The check box is selected by default.


                                                                       257
        Setting                                                                     Description

File system, access   In this drop-down list, you can select the type of file system where the directories that you want to add to scan
protocol, and path    exclusions are located:
                          Local, for local directories.
                          Mounted, for remote directories mounted on the device.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

Access protocol       You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                          NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                          Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                          Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                      This drop-down list is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

Path                  Entry field for the path to the directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to
                      specify the path.


                        You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                             [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                             [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                             [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                             [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                        You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                        id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                        Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                        For example:

                             [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                             [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                             [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                             [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                             directory >

                             [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                             < name >]/< path to local directory >

                        You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                        You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                        You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                        the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                        You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                        character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                        The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                        To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                        The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                        mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                        You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                      The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.
                      This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

Name of shared        The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
resource              exclusion scope are located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                      in the Access protocol drop-down list.




                                                                    258
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Masks                      The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                             in the directory specified in the Path field.
                             By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                             You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



                                                                        259
   Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
   to be excluded from a scan.




Critical Areas Scan in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can perform a critical areas scan of the operating system of a protected device
using the Critical Areas Scan task.

You can create and run critical areas scan user tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the settings of
the tasks.

In the Settings section of the properties of the Critical Areas Scan task, you can configure the settings listed in
the table below.

Critical Areas Scan task settings

          Setting                                                                      Description

   Scan                      This group of settings contains buttons that open windows where you can configure the scan scopes, scan scope settings,
                             and scan settings.

   Action on threat          This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Action on threat detection window,
   detection                 where you can configure the actions that the application performs on detected infected objects.


In the Exclusions section of the Critical Areas Scan task properties, you can also configure exclusion scopes or
exclusions by mask and by the threat name.




Scan scopes window
The table contains the scan scopes. The application will scan files and directories located in the paths specified in
the table. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes all directories of the local file system.

Scan scope settings

     Setting                                   Description

   Scope name         Scan scope name.

   Path               Path to the directory that the application scans.

   Status             The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


   Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
   scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
   settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

   This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



   Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                                                                          260
  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scopes.

Scan scope settings

          Setting                                                                Description

  Scan scope name         Field for entering the scan scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                          The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope          This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                          If this check box is selected, the application processes this scan scope.
                          If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this scan scope. You can later include this scope in the
                          component settings by selecting the check box.
                          The check box is selected by default.




                                                                   261
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the scan scope.
protocol, and path    You can select the file system type in the drop-down list of file systems:
                          Local (default value) – local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the path to the local directory.
                          Mounted – Mounted remote or local directories. If this item is selected, you need to indicate the protocol or name
                          of the file system.
                          Shared — The protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.
                          All shared — All of the protected server's file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Shared or Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in
                       the drop-down list on the right:
                            NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                            Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                            Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want to add to the scan scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.
                       If the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, and the path is not specified, the application
                       scans all directories of the local file system.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the scan scope are
                      located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   262
          Setting                                                                       Description

  Masks                        The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                               By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                               You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Scan scope settings window
In this window, you can configure the scan settings for the Critical Areas Scan task. The application allows you to
scan files, boot sectors, startup objects, process memory, and kernel memory.

Scan scope settings

               Setting                                                                    Description

  Scan files                         This check box enables or disables file scans.
                                     If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security will scan files.
                                     If this check box is unchecked, Kaspersky Endpoint Security will not scan files.
                                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan boot sectors                  This check box enables or disables boot sector scans.
                                     If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security will scan boot sectors.
                                     If this check box is unchecked, Kaspersky Endpoint Security will not scan boot sectors.
                                     The check box is selected by default.

  Scan kernel memory and             This check box enables or disables device memory scan.
  running processes
                                     If the check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans kernel memory and running processes.
                                     If the check box is cleared, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan kernel memory and running processes.
                                     The check box is selected by default.

  Scan startup objects               This check box enables or disables startup object scans.
                                     If this check box is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security will scan startup objects.
                                     If this check box is unchecked, Kaspersky Endpoint Security will not scan startup objects.
                                     The check box is selected by default.

  Devices to scan                    This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Scan scopes window,
                                     where you can specify the devices whose boot sectors must be scanned.

  Use global exclusions              The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the mount points specified in global exceptions while the
                                     application is running.
                                     If this check box is selected, the application excludes configured mount points from scans.
                                     The check box is selected by default.

  Use File Threat Protection         This check box enables or disables the use of configured File Threat Protection exclusions when the application
  exclusions                         is running.
                                     If the check box is selected, the application does not scan the objects specified in the exclusions for the File
                                     Threat Protection component.
                                     The check box is selected by default.




Scan scopes window
The table contains name masks of the devices, whose boot sectors the application must scan. By default, the
table contains the /** device name mask (all devices).

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.




                                                                          263
Scan settings window
In this window, you can configure the file scan settings for the task.

Scan settings

           Setting                                                                      Description

  Scan archives                This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                               To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration
                               of archive scans by configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than (MB)
                               settings in the General scan settings section.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan SFX archives            This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are the archives that
                               contain an executable extraction module.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                               This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan mail databases          This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and
                               other mail applications.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan mail format files       This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                               If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Skip file that is scanned    In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application
  for longer than (sec)        stops scanning the file.
                               Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                               Default value: 0.

  Skip file larger than (MB)   In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
                               Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, the application scans files of any size.
                               Default value: 0.

  Log clean objects            This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs events of the ObjectProcessed type for all scanned objects.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log events of the ObjectProcessed type for any scanned object.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Log unprocessed              This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during
  objects                      a scan.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Log packed objects           This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                               detected.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                               This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                         264
            Setting                                                                        Description

   Use iChecker                    This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
   technology
                                   If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                                   If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Use heuristic analysis          This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Heuristic analysis level        If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                       Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                       Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                       Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                       Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                       combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.




Action on threat detection window
In this window, you can configure actions to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security on detected infected
objects:

Actions on threat detection

     Setting                                                                        Description

   First action       In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has been
                      detected:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                          Skip the object.

   Second             In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in case the first
   action             action is unsuccessful:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                          Skip the object (default value).




Exclusions section
Scan exclusion is a set of conditions. When these conditions are met, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not scan
the objects for viruses and other malware. You can also exclude objects from scans by masks and threat names.

Settings of scan exclusions
    Group of settings                                                                   Description

   Exclusion scopes           This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this
                              window, you can define the list of scopes to be excluded from scans.

   Exclusions by mask         This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
                              configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Exclusions by              This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.




                                                                            265
Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                    Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name       Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                             The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope             The check box enables or disables exclusion of the scope from scan when the application is running.
                             If this check box is selected, the application excludes this area during scans.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application includes this area in the scan scope. You can later exclude this scope by
                             selecting the check box.
                             The check box is selected by default.




                                                                       266
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the exclusion scope.
protocol, and path
                      In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system of the directories to be excluded from
                      scans:
                          Local, for local directories.
                          Mounted – mounted directories.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in the drop-
                       down list on the right:
                           NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                           Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                           Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                         The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                         mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the exclusion scope
                      are located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   267
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Masks                      The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                             in the directory specified in the path field.
                             By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                             You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



                                                                        268
   Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
   to be excluded from a scan.




Critical Areas Scan in the command line
In the command line, you can perform a critical areas scan of the operating system of a protected device using the
Critical Areas Scan predefined task (Critical_Areas_Scan).

You can manually start, stop, pause, or resume this task and configure the task run schedule. You can configure
scan settings by editing the settings of this task.

Critical Areas Scan task settings

               Setting                                      Description                                                          Values

   ScanFiles                        Enables file scan.                                                 Yes — Scan files.
                                                                                                       No (default value) — Do not scan files.

   ScanBootSectors                  Enables boot sector scans.                                         Yes (default value) — Scan boot sectors.
                                                                                                       No — Do not scan boot sectors.

   ScanComputerMemory               Enables process memory and kernel memory                           Yes (default value) — Scan process memory and kernel
                                    scans.                                                             memory.
                                                                                                       No — Do not scan process memory and kernel memory.

   ScanStartupObjects               Enables startup object scans.                                      Yes (default value) — Scan startup objects.
                                                                                                       No — Do not scan startup objects.

   ScanArchived                     Enables scanning of archives (including SFX self-                  Yes (default value) — Scan archives. If the
                                    extracting archives).                                              FirstAction=Recommended value is specified, then,
                                    The application scans the following archives: .zip;                depending on the archive type, the application deletes
                                    .7z*; .7-z; .rar; .iso; .cab; .jar; .bz; .bz2; .tbz; .tbz2; .gz;   either the infected object or the entire archive that
                                    .tgz; .arj. The list of supported archive formats                  contains the threat.
                                    depends on the application databases being used.                   No — Do not scan archives.

   ScanSfxArchived                  Enables scanning of self-extracting archives only                  Yes (default value) — Scan self-extracting archives.
                                    (archives that contain an executable extraction
                                                                                                       No — Do not scan self-extracting archives.
                                    module).

   ScanMailBases                    Enables scanning email databases of Microsoft                      Yes — Scan files of email databases.
                                    Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat, and other mail
                                                                                                       No (default value) — Do not scan files of email databases.
                                    clients.

   ScanPlainMail                    Enables scanning of plain text email messages.                     Yes — Scan plain text email messages.
                                                                                                       No (default value) — Do not scan plain text email
                                                                                                       messages.

   SizeLimit                        Maximum size of an object to be scanned (in                        0–999999
                                    megabytes). If the object to be scanned is larger                  0 — The application scans objects of any size.
                                    than the specified value, the application skips this
                                    object.                                                            Default value: 0.

   TimeLimit                        Maximum object scan duration (in seconds). The                     0–9999
                                    application stops scanning the object if it takes
                                                                                                       0 — The object scan time is unlimited.
                                    longer than the time specified by this setting.
                                                                                                       Default value: 0.




                                                                               269
         Setting                            Description                                                   Values

FirstAction             Selection of the first action to be performed by         Disinfect — The application tries to disinfect an object
                        the application on the infected objects.                and save a copy of it to Backup. If disinfection fails (for
                                                                                example, if the type of object or the type of threat in the
                                                                                object cannot be disinfected), then the application leaves
                                                                                the object unchanged. If the first action is Disinfect , it
                                                                                is recommended to specify a second action using the
                                                                                 SecondAction setting.
                                                                                Remove — The application removes the infected object
                                                                                after creating a backup copy of it.
                                                                                Recommended (perform recommended action) — The
                                                                                application automatically selects and performs an action
                                                                                on the object based on information about the threat
                                                                                detected in the object. For example, Kaspersky Endpoint
                                                                                Security immediately removes Trojans since they
                                                                                do not incorporate themselves into other files and
                                                                                therefore they do not need to be disinfected.
                                                                                 Skip — The application does not try to disinfect or delete
                                                                                infected objects. Information about the infected object
                                                                                is logged.
                                                                                Default value: Recommended .

SecondAction            Selection of the second action to be performed          The possible values of the SecondAction setting are the
                        by the application on the infected objects. The         same as those of the FirstAction setting.
                        application performs the second action if the first
                                                                                If Skip or Remove is selected as the first action, the
                        action fails.
                                                                                second action does not need to be specified.
                                                                                It is recommended to specify two actions in all
                                                                                other cases. If you have not specified the second action,
                                                                                the application applies Skip as the second action.
                                                                                Default value: Skip .

UseExcludeMasks         Enables exclusion of the objects specified by the       Yes — Exclude objects specified by the
                        ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.              ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from scans.
                                                                                No (default value) — Do not exclude objects specified by
                                                                                the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.

ExcludeMasks.item_#     Excludes objects from being scanned by name or          The default value is not defined.
                        mask. You can use this setting to exclude an
                                                                                   Example:
                        individual file from the specified scan scope by
                                                                                   UseExcludeMasks=Yes
                        name or exclude several files at once using masks          ExcludeMasks.item_0000=eicar1.*
                        in the shell format.                                       ExcludeMasks.item_0001=eicar2.*

                        Before specifying a value for this setting, make
                        sure that the UseExcludeMasks setting is
                        enabled.

UseExcludeThreats       Enables exclusion of objects containing the             Yes — Exclude objects containing the threats specified by
                        threats specified by the ExcludeThreats setting         the ExcludeThreats.item_# setting from scans.
                        from scans.
                                                                                No (default value) — Do not exclude objects containing
                                                                                the threats specified by the ExcludeThreats.item_#
                                                                                setting from scans.

ExcludeThreats.item_#   Excludes objects from scans by the name of the          The setting value is case-sensitive.
                        threats detected in them. Before specifying a
                                                                                The default value is not defined.
                        value for this setting, make sure that the
                        UseExcludeThreats setting is enabled.                      Example:
                                                                                   UseExcludeThreats=Yes
                        In order to exclude an object from scans, specify          ExcludeThreats.item_0000=EICAR-Test-*
                        the full name of the threat detected in this object        ExcludeThreats.item_0001=?rojan.Linux
                        – the string containing the application's decision
                        that the object is infected.
                        For example, you may be using a utility to obtain
                        information about your network. To keep the
                        application from blocking it, add the full name of
                        the threat contained in it to the list of threats
                        excluded from scans.
                        You can find the full name of the threat detected
                        in an object in the application log or on the website
                        https://threats.kaspersky.com .

UseGlobalExclusions     Enables global exclusions for scanning.                 Yes (default value) — Use the global exclusions.
                                                                                No — Do not use global exclusions.



                                                           270
           Setting                                     Description                                                    Values

UseOASExclusions                  Enables File Threat Protection exclusions for            Yes (default value) — Use File Threat Protection
                                  scanning.                                                exclusions.
                                                                                           No — do not use File Threat Protection exclusions.

ReportCleanObjects                Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about non-infected objects.
                                  objects that the application reports as not being
                                                                                            No (default value) — Do not log information about non-
                                  infected.
                                                                                           infected objects.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make
                                  sure that a particular object was scanned by the
                                  application.

ReportPackedObjects               Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about scanned objects within
                                  objects that are part of compound objects.               archives.
                                  You can enable this setting, for example, to make        No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                  sure that an object within an archive has been           scanned objects within archives.
                                  scanned by the application.

ReportUnprocessedObjects          Enables logging of information about objects that        Yes — Log information about unprocessed objects.
                                  have not been processed for some reason.
                                                                                           No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                                                                           unprocessed objects.

UseAnalyzer                       Enables heuristic analysis.                              Yes (default value) — Enable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  Heuristic analysis helps the application to detect       No — Disable Heuristic Analyzer.
                                  threats even before they become known to virus
                                  analysts.

HeuristicLevel                    Specifies the heuristic analysis level.                  Light — The least thorough scan with minimum load on
                                  You can specify the heuristic analysis level. The        the system.
                                  heuristic analysis level sets the balance between        Medium — A medium heuristic analysis level with a
                                  the thoroughness of searches for threats, the load       balanced load on the system.
                                  on the operating system's resources, and the scan
                                                                                           Deep — The most thorough scan with maximum load on
                                  duration. The higher the heuristic analysis level, the
                                                                                           the system.
                                  more resources and time are required for
                                  scanning.                                                Recommended (default value) — The recommended value.

UseIChecker                       Enables usage of the iChecker technology.                Yes (default value) — Enable use of the iChecker
                                                                                           technology.
                                                                                           No — Disable use of the iChecker technology.

DeviceNameMasks.item_#            List of device names. The application will scan          AllObjects – scan boot sectors of all devices.
                                  boot sectors of these devices.
                                                                                           < device name mask > – Scan boot sectors of the
                                  The setting value cannot be empty. At least one          devices whose names match the specified mask.
                                  device name mask must be specified to run this
                                                                                           Default value: /** – any set of characters in the device
                                  task.
                                                                                           name, including the / character.

The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                          Description of the scan scope, which contains            Default value: All objects .
                                  additional information about the scan scope.
                                                                                              Example:
                                  The maximum length of the string specified using
                                                                                              AreaDesc=" Mail bases scan "
                                  this setting is 4096 characters.



UseScanArea                       Enables scans of the specified scope. To run the         Yes (default value) — Scan the specified scope.
                                  task, enable scans of at least one scope.
                                                                                           No — Do not scan the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                   Scan scope limitation. Within the scan scope, the        The default value is * (scan all objects).
                                  application scans only the files that are specified
                                                                                              Example:
                                  using the masks in the shell format.
                                                                                              AreaMask.item_< item number >=*doc
                                  If this setting is not specified, the application
                                  scans all the objects in the scan scope.
                                  You can specify several values for this setting.




                                                                      271
           Setting                                   Description                                                   Values

Path                             Path to the directory with objects to be scanned.      < path to local directory > — Scan objects in the
                                                                                        specified directory.
                                                                                        Shared:NFS — Scan the device file system resources
                                                                                        that are accessible via the NFS protocol.
                                                                                        Shared:SMB – Scan the device file system resources that
                                                                                        are accessible via the Samba protocol.
                                                                                        Mounted:NFS – Scan the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                        a device using the NFS protocol.
                                                                                        Mounted:SMB – Scan the remote directories mounted on
                                                                                        a device using the Samba protocol.
                                                                                        AllRemoteMounted – Scan all remote directories
                                                                                        mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                                        protocols.
                                                                                        AllShared – Scan all the device file system resources
                                                                                        that are accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                                                                        < file system type > — Scan all the resources of the
                                                                                        specified device file system.

The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                         Description of the scan exclusion scope, which         The default value is not defined.
                                 contains additional information about the
                                 exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                      Excludes the specified scope from scans.               Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope.
                                                                                        No — Do not exclude the specified scope.

AreaMask.item_#                  Limitation of scan exclusion scope. In the exclusion   Default value: * (exclude all objects)
                                 scope, the application excludes only the files that
                                 are specified using masks in the shell format.
                                 If this setting is not specified, the application
                                 excludes all the objects in the exclusion scope.
                                 You can specify several values for this setting.




                                                                     272
       Setting                      Description                                                    Values

Path             Path to the directory with objects to be excluded.   < path to local directory > — Exclude objects in the
                                                                      specified directory (including subdirectories) from scans.
                                                                      You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                        You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                        directory name mask.

                                                                        You can indicate a single * character to represent any set
                                                                        of characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                                        character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                        /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                        You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                        represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
                                                                        the / character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                        /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                        The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                                        example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                        You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                        character in the file or directory name.


                                                                      In order to optimize the operation of scan tasks, it is
                                                                      recommended to add the path with snapshots mounted
                                                                      by the system in the read-only mode to the exclusions for
                                                                      the systems with the btrfs file system and enabled active
                                                                      snapshots. For example, for the systems based on
                                                                      SUSE/OpenSUSE, you can add the following exclusion
                                                                       /.snapshots/*/snapshot/ .
                                                                      Mounted:NFS – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                      on a device using the NFS protocol from scan.
                                                                      Mounted:SMB – Exclude the remote directories mounted
                                                                      on a device using the Samba protocol from scan.
                                                                      AllRemoteMounted – Exclude all remote directories
                                                                      mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                      protocols from scan.
                                                                      < file system type > — Exclude all the resources of
                                                                      the specified device file system from scans.



                                                                         Remote directories are excluded from scanning by
                                                                         the application only if they were mounted before
                                                                         the task was started. Remote directories mounted
                                                                         after the task is started are not excluded from
                                                                         scanning.




                                                   273
Removable Drives Scan
Kaspersky Endpoint Security can scan the following removable drives when they are connected to the protected
device: CDs, DVDs, Blu-ray discs, flash drives (including USB modems), external hard drives, and floppy disks.

If the removable drives scan is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security monitors the connection of removable drives
to the protected device and, if a connected removable drive is detected, it scans the drive and its boot sectors for
viruses and other malware.

By default, the application does not monitor for the connection of removable drives or scan these.




Configuring Removable Drives Scan in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure the settings for the removable drives scan in the policy properties
(Application settings → Local Tasks → Removable Drives Scan).

Removable Drives Scan component settings

           Setting                                                                            Description

  Removable drives scan       This option enables or disables the scan of removable drives when they are connected to the user device.
  enabled / disabled
                              The toggle button is switched off by default.

  Action when a               In the drop-down list, you can select an action to be performed by the application upon connection of removable
  removable drive             drives to the user device:
  connects                        Do not scan removable drives when connected (default value).
                                  Quick scan – only scan files of certain types on removable drives (except CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs) and
                                  do not unpack compound objects. A quick scan is performed using the default settings for the Critical Areas
                                  Scan task.

                                    The following file formats are scanned on removable media: com, exe, sys, prg, bin, bat, cmd, dpl, dll, scr, cpl, ocx, tsp, drv,
                                    vxd, pif, lnk, reg, ini, cia, vbs, vbe, js, jse, htm, htt, hta, asp, chm, pht, wsh, wsf, the, hip, eml, nws, msg, pig, mbx, doc*, dot*,
                                    fpm, rtf, shs, dwg, msi, otm, pdf, swf, jpeg, emf, ico, ov?, xl*, xlsb, pp*, md*, sldx, sldm, thmx.


                                  Detailed scan – scan all files on removable drives (except CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs). A detailed scan is
                                  performed using the default settings for the Malware Scan task.

  Action when a CD / DVD      In the drop-down list, you can select an action to be performed by the application upon connection of CD/DVD drives
  drive connects              and Blu-ray discs to the user device:
                                  Do not scan CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs when connected (default value).
                                  Quick scan: only scans files of certain types on CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs. A quick scan is performed
                                  using the default settings for the Critical Areas Scan task.

                                    The following file formats are scanned on removable media: com, exe, sys, prg, bin, bat, cmd, dpl, dll, scr, cpl, ocx, tsp, drv,
                                    vxd, pif, lnk, reg, ini, cia, vbs, vbe, js, jse, htm, htt, hta, asp, chm, pht, wsh, wsf, the, hip, eml, nws, msg, pig, mbx, doc*, dot*,
                                    fpm, rtf, shs, dwg, msi, otm, pdf, swf, jpeg, emf, ico, ov?, xl*, xlsb, pp*, md*, sldx, sldm, thmx.


                                  Detailed scan – scan all files on CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs. A detailed scan is performed using the default
                                  settings for the Malware Scan task.

  Block access to the         This check box enables or disables blocking of files on the connected drive during execution of the scan.
  removable drive while       This check box is cleared by default.
  scanning




                                                                             274
Configuring Removable Drives Scan in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure the settings for the removable drives scan in the policy
properties (Local Tasks → Removable Drives Scan).

Removable Drives Scan component settings

            Setting                                                                            Description

  Enable removable drives       This check box enables or disables the scan of removable drives when they are connected to the user device.
  scan when connected to        This check box is cleared by default.
  the device

  Action when a removable       In the drop-down list, you can select an action to be performed by the application upon connection of removable
  drive connects                drives to the user device:
                                    Do not scan removable drives when connected (default value).
                                    Quick scan – only scan files of certain types on removable drives (except CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs)
                                    and do not unpack compound objects. A quick scan is performed using the default settings for the Critical
                                    Areas Scan task.

                                      The following file formats are scanned on removable media: com, exe, sys, prg, bin, bat, cmd, dpl, dll, scr, cpl, ocx, tsp,
                                      drv, vxd, pif, lnk, reg, ini, cia, vbs, vbe, js, jse, htm, htt, hta, asp, chm, pht, wsh, wsf, the, hip, eml, nws, msg, pig, mbx, doc*,
                                      dot*, fpm, rtf, shs, dwg, msi, otm, pdf, swf, jpeg, emf, ico, ov?, xl*, xlsb, pp*, md*, sldx, sldm, thmx.


                                    Detailed scan – scan all files on removable drives (except CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs). A detailed scan is
                                    performed using the default settings for the Malware Scan task.

  Action when a CD / DVD        In the drop-down list, you can select an action to be performed by the application upon connection of CD/DVD
  drive connects                drives and Blu-ray discs to the user device:
                                    Do not scan CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs when connected (default value).
                                    Quick scan: only scans files of certain types on CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs. A quick scan is performed
                                    using the default settings for the Critical Areas Scan task.

                                      The following file formats are scanned on removable media: com, exe, sys, prg, bin, bat, cmd, dpl, dll, scr, cpl, ocx, tsp,
                                      drv, vxd, pif, lnk, reg, ini, cia, vbs, vbe, js, jse, htm, htt, hta, asp, chm, pht, wsh, wsf, the, hip, eml, nws, msg, pig, mbx, doc*,
                                      dot*, fpm, rtf, shs, dwg, msi, otm, pdf, swf, jpeg, emf, ico, ov?, xl*, xlsb, pp*, md*, sldx, sldm, thmx.


                                    Detailed scan – scan all files on CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs. A detailed scan is performed using the
                                    default settings for the Malware Scan task.

  Block access to the           This check box enables or disables blocking of files on the connected drive during execution of the scan.
  removable drive while
                                This check box is cleared by default.
  scanning




Configuring Removable Drives Scan in the command line
On the command line, you can manage removable media scanning using the Removable Drives Scan predefined
task (Removable_Drives_Scan).

Removable Drives Scan is not running by default. You can start and stop this task manually. You can configure scan
settings by editing the settings of this task.

If the task is running, the application monitors the connection of removable drives to the device and, when a
removable drive is connected, it creates and starts a temporary boot sector scan task (task of the ODS type). This
task cannot be stopped. After the task execution completes, the application automatically deletes the task.




                                                                            275
If you enabled file scanning in the Removable Drives Scan task settings, the application also starts one or more
temporary custom file scan tasks (tasks of the ODS type). If necessary, a user with administrator privileges can
stop these tasks.

If you modify the Removable Drives Scan task settings, the new values are not applied to temporary tasks that are
already running. Stopping the Removable Drives Scan task does not stop temporary tasks that are already running.

Removable Drives Scan task settings

           Setting                          Description                                                                 Values

   ScanRemovableDrives        Enables the scanning of removable             DetailedScan — Scan all files on removable media (except CD/DVD and
                              media when it is connected to the             Blu-ray discs).
                              device.
                                                                            A detailed scan is performed with the default settings for the Scan_File
                              This setting does not apply to CD/DVD         task (ID: 3).
                              drives and Blu-ray discs (see the
                                                                            QuickScan — Scan only files of specific types on removable media
                              ScanOpticalDrives setting).
                                                                            (except CD/DVD and Blu-ray discs).

                                                                              The following file formats are scanned on removable media: com, exe, sys, prg,
                                                                              bin, bat, cmd, dpl, dll, scr, cpl, ocx, tsp, drv, vxd, pif, lnk, reg, ini, cia, vbs, vbe, js,
                                                                              jse, htm, htt, hta, asp, chm, pht, wsh, wsf, the, hip, eml, nws, msg, pig, mbx, doc*,
                                                                              dot*, fpm, rtf, shs, dwg, msi, otm, pdf, swf, jpeg, emf, ico, ov?, xl*, xlsb, pp*, md*,
                                                                              sldx, sldm, thmx.


                                                                            A quick scan is performed with the default settings for the
                                                                            Critical_Areas_Scan task (ID: 4).
                                                                            NoScan (default value) — Do not scan removable media when it is
                                                                            connected to the device.

   ScanOpticalDrives          Enables the scanning of CD/DVD drives         DetailedScan — Scan all files on CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs.
                              and Blu-ray discs when they are
                                                                            A detailed scan is performed with the default settings for the Scan_File
                              connected to the device.
                                                                            task (ID: 3).
                                                                            QuickScan — Scan only files of specific types on CD/DVD drives and Blu-
                                                                            ray discs.

                                                                              The following file formats are scanned on removable media: com, exe, sys, prg,
                                                                              bin, bat, cmd, dpl, dll, scr, cpl, ocx, tsp, drv, vxd, pif, lnk, reg, ini, cia, vbs, vbe, js,
                                                                              jse, htm, htt, hta, asp, chm, pht, wsh, wsf, the, hip, eml, nws, msg, pig, mbx, doc*,
                                                                              dot*, fpm, rtf, shs, dwg, msi, otm, pdf, swf, jpeg, emf, ico, ov?, xl*, xlsb, pp*, md*,
                                                                              sldx, sldm, thmx.


                                                                            A quick scan is performed with the default settings for the
                                                                            Critical_Areas_Scan task (ID: 4).
                                                                            NoScan (default value) — Do not scan CD/DVD drives and Blu-ray discs
                                                                            when they are connected.

   BlockDuringScan            Enables the blocking of files on a            Yes — Block files during the scan.
                              connected disk during scanning. While
                                                                            No (default value) — Do not block files during the scan.
                              scanning boot sectors, files are not
                              blocked.




                                                                      276
Container Scan
You can scan containers and images for malware in real time and on demand:

   The Container Monitoring component allows you to scan launched containers and namespaces in real time.

   You can use the Container Scan tasks to scan containers and images on demand.


  To use the Container Scan functionality, a license that includes this function is required.


Application supports integration with Docker container management system, CRI-O framework, and Podman and
runc utilities is supported.


  Integration with Docker 28.5.2 and earlier is supported.




Container monitoring
The Container Monitoring component is enabled by default. The application scans running containers and
namespaces in real time.


  For the Container Monitoring component to work, the File Threat Protection component must be enabled.
  The File Threat Protection settings are used when scanning containers and namespaces.



  The application does not scan namespaces and containers unless components for working with containers
  and namespaces are installed in the operating system. In this case, the component status for Container
  Monitoring on the command line is displayed as "Task is available and not running", whereas in
  Kaspersky Security Center, it is displayed as "Stopped".


You can enable or disable the Container Monitoring component, and also configure the settings for scanning
containers and namespaces in real time:

   Select the action that the application performs on a container when it detects an infected object.


     This setting is available when using the application under a license that supports this function.


   Configure the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Docker container management system, CRI-
   O framework, and Podman and runc utilities.


     Integration with Docker 28.5.2 and earlier is supported.




                                                        277
Configuring container monitoring in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can manage the operation of the Container Monitoring component in the policy
properties (Application settings → General settings → Container Scan settings).

Container monitoring settings

                   Setting                                                             Description

  Namespace and container scan        This toggle switch enables or disables the scanning of namespaces and containers in real time.
  enabled / disabled                  The check toggle button is switched on by default.

  Action with container upon threat   You can select the action that the application performs on a container when it detects an infected
  detection                           object:
                                          Skip container: if an infected object is detected, the application does not perform any action on
                                          the container.
                                          Stop container: if an infected object is detected, the application stops the container.
                                          Stop container if disinfection fails (default value) – the application stops the container if
                                          disinfection of the infected object fails.


                                         This setting is available when using the application under a license that supports this function.




  Use Docker                          This check box enables or disables the use of the Docker container management system.
                                      The check box is selected by default.


                                         Integration with Docker 28.5.2 and earlier is supported.




  Docker socket path                  Entry field for the path or URI (Uniform Resource Identifier) of the Docker socket.
                                      Default value: /var/run/docker.sock.

  Use CRI-O                           The check box enables or disables the use of the CRI-O environment.
                                      The check box is selected by default.

  File path                           Entry field for the path to CRI-O configuration file.
                                      Default value: /etc/crio/crio.conf.

  Use Podman                          The check box enables or disables the use of the Podman utility.
                                      The check box is selected by default.

  File path                           Entry field for the path to the Podman utility executable file.
                                      Default value: /usr/bin/podman.

  Root directory                      Entry field for the path to the root directory of the container storage.
                                      Default value: /var/lib/containers/storage.

  Use runc                            The check box enables or disables the use of the runc utility.
                                      The check box is selected by default.

  File path                           Entry field for the path to the runc utility executable file.
                                      Default value: /usr/bin/runc.

  Root directory                      Entry field for the path to the root directory of the container state storage.
                                      Default value: /run/runc.




                                                                  278
Configuring container monitoring in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can manage the operation of the Container Monitoring component in the policy
properties (Application settings → General settings → Container Scan settings).

Container monitoring settings

                   Setting                                                                      Description

  Enable namespace and container               This check box enables or disables the scanning of namespaces and containers in real time.
  scan                                         The check box is selected by default.

  Action with container upon threat            In the drop-down list, you can select the action to be performed on a container when an infected object is
  detection                                    detected:
                                                    Skip container: if an infected object is detected, the application does not perform any action on the
                                                    container.
                                                    Stop container: if an infected object is detected, the application stops the container.
                                                    Stop container if disinfection fails (default value) – the application stops the container if
                                                    disinfection of the infected object fails.


                                                  This setting is available when using the application under a license that supports this function.




  Container Scan settings                      The group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Container Scan
                                               settings window.




Container Scan settings window
In this window, you can edit the settings for integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Docker container
management system, the CRI-O environment, and the Podman and runc utilities.

Container Scan settings

         Setting                                                     Description

  Use Docker                 This check box enables or disables the use of the Docker container management system.
                             The check box is selected by default.


                                Docker 28.5.2 and earlier is supported.




  Docker socket path         Entry field for the path or URI (Uniform Resource Identifier) of the Docker socket.
                             Default value: /var/run/docker.sock.

  Use CRI-O                  The check box enables or disables the use of the CRI-O environment.
                             The check box is selected by default.

  File path                  Entry field for the path to CRI-O configuration file.
                             Default value: /etc/crio/crio.conf.

  Use Podman                 The check box enables or disables the use of the Podman utility.
                             The check box is selected by default.

  File path                  Entry field for the path to the Podman utility executable file.
                             Default value: /usr/bin/podman.

  Root directory             Entry field for the path to the root directory of the container storage.

  Use runc                   The check box enables or disables the use of the runc utility.
                             The check box is selected by default.


                                                                            279
        Setting                                                Description

  File path           Entry field for the path to the runc utility executable file.
                      Default value: /usr/bin/runc.

  Root directory      Entry field for the path to the root directory of the container state storage.
                      Default value: /run/runc.




Configuring container monitoring in the command line
In the command line, you can enable or disable real-time scanning of namespaces and containers by using the
NamespaceMonitoring=Yes/No setting from the general application settings.

You can edit the value for the setting NamespaceMonitoring using the configuration file that contains all general
application settings, or using command line options.

When scanning namespaces and containers in real time, the general Container Scan settings are used. You can
view and edit these settings using special administration commands for Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   You can output the current values of general Container Scan settings to the console or to a configuration file.
   You can use this file to edit the settings.

   You can edit all general Container Scan settings using the configuration file that contains the settings. You can
   get the configuration file using the command for displaying general Container Scan settings.

   You can edit individual settings using command line options in the < setting name >=< setting value >
   format. You can get the current values of the settings using the command for displaying general Container
   Scan settings.

To output the current values of general Container Scan settings to the console, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-container-settings [--json]


  where --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the
  settings are output in the INI format.


To output the current values of general Container Scan settings to a file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-container-settings --file < path to configuration file > [--json]


  where:


   --file < path to configuration file > is the path to the file where the general Container Scan settings
   will be saved. If you specify the name of a file without specifying its path, the file will be created
   in the current directory. If a file with the specified name already exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten.
   If the specified directory cannot be found on the disk, file will not be created.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.




                                                                       280
To edit the values of the general Container Scan settings using a configuration file:

 1. Output the general Container Scan settings to the configuration file, as described above.

 2. Edit the values of the necessary parameters in the file and save the changes.

 3. Execute the command:
   kesl-control --set-container-settings --file < path to configuration file > [--json]
   where:

      --file < path to configuration file > is the full path to the configuration file with the General
      Container Scan settings.

      Specify the --json option if you are importing settings from a JSON configuration file. If the --json
      option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
      displayed.

  All the values of the general Container Scan settings defined in the file will be imported into the application.


To edit values of general Container Scan settings using command line options, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-container-settings < setting name >=< setting value > [< setting name >=
  < setting value >]


  where < setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the general Container Scan
  settings.


  The values of the specified general Container Scan settings will be changed.




On-demand scan of containers and images
When the Container Scan task is running, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans containers and images for viruses
and other malware. The application can run multiple Container Scan tasks simultaneously.


  A license that covers the Container Scan task is required to use this functionality.


Application supports integration with Docker container management system, CRI-O framework, and Podman and
runc utilities is supported.


  Integration with Docker 28.5.2 and earlier is supported.


You can start a Container Scan and configure the settings of the scan:

   Specify the containers and images to be scanned by name or name mask.

   Enables scanning of all layers of images and containers.



                                                          281
    Select the action that the application will perform on the container and the action that the application will
    perform on the image when an infected object is detected.

    Configure settings for scanning objects inside containers or images:

        Enable or disable scanning of archives, mail databases, email messages in text format.

        Limit the size of an object to be scanned and the duration of the object scan.

        Select the actions to be performed by the application on the infected objects.

        Configure exclusions of objects from scans:

            by name or mask

            by the name of the threats detected in the objects

        Enable or disable the use of global exclusions when scanning.

        Configure the use of the heuristic analyzer and iChecker technology during a scan.

        Enable or disable the logging of information about scanned non-infected objects, about scanning objects in
        archives, and about unprocessed objects.



Container Scan in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can scan containers and images using the Container Scan task.

You can create and run Container Scan user tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the settings of
the tasks.

Container Scan task settings

           Setting                                                                    Description

  Scan archives                This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                               To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration
                               of archive scans by configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than (MB)
                               settings in the General scan settings section.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan SFX archives            This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are the archives that
                               contain an executable extraction module.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                               This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan mail databases          This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and
                               other mail applications.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                               This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                        282
         Setting                                                                      Description

Scan mail format files       This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                             If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

Skip file that is scanned    In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application
for longer than (sec)        stops scanning the file.
                             Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                             Default value: 0.

Skip file larger than (MB)   In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
                             Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, the application scans files of any size.
                             Default value: 0.

Log clean objects            This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                             If this check box is selected, the application logs events of the ObjectProcessed type for all scanned objects.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application does not log events of the ObjectProcessed type for any scanned object.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

Log unprocessed              This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during
objects                      a scan.
                             If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

Log packed objects           This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                             detected.
                             If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                             This check box is cleared by default.

Use iChecker                 This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
technology                   If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                             If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                             The check box is selected by default.

Use heuristic analysis       This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                             The check box is selected by default.

Heuristic analysis level     If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                 Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                 Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                 Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                 Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                 combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.

First action                 In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that
                             has been detected:
                                 Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                                 file and about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                                 Skip the object.

Second action                In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in
                             case the first action is unsuccessful:
                                 Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                                 Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the
                                 file and about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                                 Skip the object (default value).

Scan containers              This check box enables or disables container scans. If the check box is selected, you can specify a name or a name
                             mask for containers to be scanned.
                             The check box is selected by default.




                                                                       283
            Setting                                                                   Description

   Name mask                  Entry field for a name or a name mask for containers to be scanned.
                              By default, the * mask is specified – all containers will be scanned.

   Action on threat           You can select the action that the application performs on a container when it detects an infected object:
   detection                      Skip container – do not perform any actions on the container when an infected object is detected.
                                  Stop container – stop container when an infected object is detected.
                                  Stop container if disinfection fails (default value) – stop the container if disinfection of the infected object or
                                  elimination of the threat fails.



                                 Due to the way a CRI-O environment works, an infected object is not disinfected or deleted in a container in a
                                 CRI-O environment. We recommend to select the Stop container action.




   Scan images                This check box enables or disables the image scan. If the check box is selected, you can specify a name or a name
                              mask for images to be scanned.
                              The check box is selected by default.

   Name mask                  Entry field for a name or a name mask for images to be scanned.
                              By default, the * mask is specified (all images are scanned).

   Action on threat           You can select the action that the application performs on a container when it detects an infected object:
   detection                      Skip image (default value) – do not perform any actions on the image when an infected object is detected.
                                  Delete image when an infected object is detected (not recommended). All dependencies will also be deleted.
                                  Running containers will be stopped, and then deleted.

   Scan each layer            This check box enables or disables the scanning of all layers of images and running containers.
                              This check box is cleared by default.




Exclusion scopes section
In the Exclusion scopes section for the Container Scan task, you can configure exclusions by mask and by threat
name, as well as the use of global exclusions when the task is running.

Settings of scan exclusions

            Setting                                                                   Description

   Configure exclusions by    Clicking the Configure exclusions by mask link opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
   mask                       configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Configure exclusions by    Clicking the Configure exclusions by threat name link opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.

   Use global exclusions      The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the mount points specified in global exceptions while the
                              application is running.
                              If this check box is selected, the application excludes configured mount points from scans.
                              The check box is selected by default.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


   Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
   excluded from a scan.


                                                                       284
  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
  to be excluded from a scan.




Container Scan in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can scan containers and images using the Container Scan task.

You can create and run Container Scan user tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the settings of
the tasks.

In the Settings section of the properties of the Container Scan task, you can configure the settings listed in the
table below.




                                                                   285
Container Scan task settings

         Setting                                                                    Description

  Scan                    This group of settings contains buttons that open windows where you can configure the Container Scan settings and
                          general scan settings.

  Action on threat        This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Action on threat detection window,
  detection               where you can configure the actions that the application performs on detected infected objects.


In the Exclusions section in the task properties, you can also configure exclusions by mask and by threat name for
the Container Scan task.



Container Scan settings window
In this window, you can configure container and image scan settings.

Container and image scan settings

         Setting                                                                     Description

  Scan containers          This check box enables or disables container scans. If the check box is selected, you can specify a name or a name mask
                           for containers to be scanned.
                           The check box is selected by default.

  Name mask                Entry field for a name or a name mask for containers to be scanned.
                           By default, the * mask is specified – all containers will be scanned.

  Action on threat         In the drop-down list, you can select the action to be performed on a container when an infected object is detected:
  detection
                                Skip container – do not perform any actions on the container when an infected object is detected.
                                Stop container – stop container when an infected object is detected.
                                Stop container if disinfection fails (default value) – stop the container if disinfection of the infected object or
                                elimination of the threat fails.


                               Due to the way a CRI-O environment works, an infected object is not disinfected or deleted in a container in a CRI-O
                               environment. We recommend to select the Stop container action.




  Scan images              This check box enables or disables the image scan. If the check box is selected, you can specify a name or a name mask for
                           images to be scanned.
                           The check box is selected by default.

  Name mask                Entry field for a name or a name mask for images to be scanned.
                           By default, the * mask is specified (all images are scanned).

  Action on threat         In the drop-down list, you can select the action to be performed on an image when an infected object is detected:
  detection
                                Skip image (default value) – do not perform any actions on the image when an infected object is detected.
                                Delete image when an infected object is detected (not recommended). All dependencies will also be deleted. Running
                                containers will be stopped, and then deleted.

  Scan each layer          This check box enables or disables the scanning of all layers of images and running containers.
                           This check box is cleared by default.




Scan settings window
In this window, you can configure the file scan settings for the task.




                                                                         286
Scan settings

           Setting                                                                      Description

  Scan archives                This check box enables or disables scan of archives.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans the archives.
                               To scan an archive, the application has to unpack it first, which may slow down scanning. You can reduce the duration
                               of archive scans by configuring the Skip file that is scanned for longer than (sec) and Skip file larger than (MB)
                               settings in the General scan settings section.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan the archives.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan SFX archives            This check box enables or disables self-extracting archive scans. Self-extracting archives are the archives that
                               contain an executable extraction module.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans self-extracting archives.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan self-extracting archives.
                               This check box is available if the Scan archives check box is unchecked.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Scan mail databases          This check box enables or disables scans of mail databases of Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat!, and
                               other mail applications.
                               If the check box is selected, the application scans mail database files.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application does not scan mail database files.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Scan mail format files       This check box enables or disables scan of files of plain-text email messages.
                               If this check box is selected, the application scans plain-text messages.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not scan plain-text messages.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Skip file that is scanned    In this field, you can specify the maximum time to scan a file, in seconds. After the specified time, the application
  for longer than (sec)        stops scanning the file.
                               Available values: 0–9999. If the value is set to 0, the scan time is unlimited.
                               Default value: 0.

  Skip file larger than (MB)   In this field, you can specify the maximum size of a file to scan, in megabytes.
                               Available values: 0–999999. If the value is set to 0, the application scans files of any size.
                               Default value: 0.

  Log clean objects            This check box enables or disables the logging of ObjectProcessed type events.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs events of the ObjectProcessed type for all scanned objects.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log events of the ObjectProcessed type for any scanned object.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Log unprocessed              This check box enables or disables the logging ObjectNotProcessed type events if a file cannot be processed during
  objects                      a scan.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the ObjectNotProcessed type.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Log packed objects           This check box enables or disables the logging of PackedObjectDetected type events for all packed objects that are
                               detected.
                               If this check box is selected, the application logs the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application does not log the events of the PackedObjectDetected type.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Use iChecker                 This check box enables or disables scan of only new and modified since the last scan files.
  technology                   If the check box is selected, the application scans only new files or the files modified since the last scan.
                               If the check box is cleared, the application scans the files regardless of the creation or modification date.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Use heuristic analysis       This check box enables or disables heuristic analysis during file scans.
                               The check box is selected by default.




                                                                         287
            Setting                                                                       Description

   Heuristic analysis level        If the Use heuristic analysis check box is selected, you can select the heuristic analysis level in the drop-down list:
                                       Light is the least detailed scan with minimal system load.
                                       Medium is a medium scan with balanced system load.
                                       Deep is the most detailed scan with maximum system load.
                                       Recommended (default value) is the optimal level recommended by Kaspersky experts. It ensures an optimal
                                       combination of protection quality and impact on the performance of the protected devices.




Action on threat detection window
In this window, you can configure actions to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security on detected infected
objects:

Actions on threat detection

     Setting                                                                       Description

   First action       In this drop-down list, you can select the first action to be performed by the application on an infected object that has been
                      detected:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it (default value).
                          Skip the object.

   Second             In this drop-down list, you can select the second action to be performed by the application on an infected object, in case the first
   action             action is unsuccessful:
                          Disinfect the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Remove the object. A copy of the infected object will be moved to the Backup.
                          Perform recommended action on the object, based on data about the danger level of the threat detected in the file and
                          about the possibility of disinfecting it.
                          Skip the object (default value).




Exclusions section
Settings of scan exclusions

    Group of settings                                                                  Description

   Exclusions by mask         This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
                              configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.

   Exclusions by              This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by threat name window. In this window,
   threat name                you can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name.

   Use global                 The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the mount points specified in global exceptions while the application is
   exclusions                 running.
                              If this check box is selected, the application excludes configured mount points from scans.
                              The check box is selected by default.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


                                                                            288
  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by threat name window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on threat name. The application will not block the
specified threats. By default, the list of threat names is empty.

You can add, edit, and delete threat names.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected threat from the
  exclusion list.

  This button is available if at least one threat name is selected in the list.



  Clicking the threat name in the table opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can edit the name of
  the threat to be excluded from a scan.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Threat name window. In this window, you can define the name of the threat
  to be excluded from a scan.




                                                                   289
Container Scan in the command line
On the command line, you can scan containers and images in the following ways:

    Using the Container Scan predefined task (Container_Scan). You can manually start or stop this task, and
    configure the task run schedule. You can configure scan settings by editing the settings of this task.

    Using Container Scan user tasks (tasks of the ContainerScan type). You can manually start and stop user tasks
    and configure the task run schedule.

    Using the command kesl-control --scan-container, you can perform a custom scan of the specified
    containers and images.



Container scan task settings
The table describes all available values and the default values of all the container and image scan settings.

Container scan task settings

           Setting                                Description                                                             Values

   ScanContainers              Scan of containers specified by mask You can         Yes (default value) — Scan containers defined by mask.
                               specify masks using the ContainerNameMask
                                                                                    No — Do not scan containers defined by mask.
                               setting.

   ContainerNameMask           Specifies a name or a name mask that defines a       Default value: * (scan all containers).
                               container to scan.
                                                                                       Examples:
                               Masks are specified in command shell format. You        Scan a container with my_container name:
                               can use the ? and * symbols.                            ContainerNameMask=my_container
                                                                                       Scan all containers whose names start with my_container:
                               Before specifying this setting, make sure that          ContainerNameMask=my_container*
                                                                                       Scan all containers whose names start with my_, then contain any five
                               ScanContainers=Yes .
                                                                                       characters, then _container, and end with any characters sequence:
                                                                                       ContainerNameMask=my_?????_container*




   ScanImages                  Scan of images specified by mask You can             Yes (default value) — Scan images defined by mask.
                               specify masks using the ImageNameMask
                                                                                    No — Do not scan images defined by mask.
                               setting.

   ImageNameMask               Specifies a name or a name mask that define          Default value: * (scan all images).
                               images to scan.
                                                                                       Examples:
                               Before specifying this setting, make sure that the      Scan images with the "my_image" name, and the "latest" tag:
                               ScanImages setting is set to Yes .                      ImageNameMask=my_image:latest
                                                                                       Scan all images whose names start with my_image_ and with any tag:
                               Masks are specified in command shell format.            ImageNameMask=my_image*

                               If you want to specify several masks, each mask
                               must be specified on a new line with a new index.

   DeepScan                    Checking all image layers and running containers.    Yes – Scan all layers.
                                                                                    No (default value) – Do not scan any layer.




                                                                        290
           Setting                                  Description                                                               Values

   ContainerScanAction         Action to be performed on a container when an                   StopContainerIfFailed (default value) — The application
                               infected object is detected. Actions on an                      stops the container if an infected object could not be disinfected
                               infected object inside the container are                        or deleted.
                               described below.

                                                                                                   Due to the way a CRI-O environment works, an infected
                                                                                                   object is not disinfected or deleted in a container in a CRI-O
                                                                                                   environment. We recommend to select the
                                                                                                   StopContainer action.



                                                                                                StopContainer — The application stops the container when an
                                                                                               infected object is detected.
                                                                                               Skip — The application does not perform any action on
                                                                                               containers when an infected object is detected.

   ImageAction                 Specifies the action to be performed on an                      Skip (default value) — The application does not perform any
                               image when an infected object is detected.                      action on images when an infected object is detected.
                               Actions on an infected object inside the image
                                                                                               Delete — The application deletes the image when an infected
                               are described below.
                                                                                               object is detected (not recommended).


                                                                                                   All dependencies will also be deleted. Running containers will
                                                                                                   be stopped, and then deleted.




The StopContainerIfFailed action taken on a container when an infected object is detected can vary
depending on the specified values of the FirstAction and SecondAction settings, which are applied to objects
inside containers and images. If the application fails to disinfect or remove the infected object when performing
the FirstAction and SecondAction actions, the container will be stopped. In all other cases, no action is applied
to the container.

The settings described below are applied to the objects inside containers and images.

Container scan task settings

               Setting                                       Description                                                          Values

   ScanArchived                      Enables scanning of archives (including SFX self-                  Yes (default value) — Scan archives. If the
                                     extracting archives).                                              FirstAction=Recommended value is specified, then,
                                     The application scans the following archives: .zip;                depending on the archive type, the application deletes
                                     .7z*; .7-z; .rar; .iso; .cab; .jar; .bz; .bz2; .tbz; .tbz2; .gz;   either the infected object or the entire archive that
                                     .tgz; .arj. The list of supported archive formats                  contains the threat.
                                     depends on the application databases being used.                   No — Do not scan archives.

   ScanSfxArchived                   Enables scanning of self-extracting archives only                  Yes (default value) — Scan self-extracting archives.
                                     (archives that contain an executable extraction
                                                                                                        No — Do not scan self-extracting archives.
                                     module).

   ScanMailBases                     Enables scanning email databases of Microsoft                      Yes — Scan files of email databases.
                                     Outlook, Outlook Express, The Bat, and other mail
                                                                                                        No (default value) — Do not scan files of email databases.
                                     clients.

   ScanPlainMail                     Enables scanning of plain text email messages.                     Yes — Scan plain text email messages.
                                                                                                        No (default value) — Do not scan plain text email
                                                                                                        messages.

   TimeLimit                         Maximum object scan duration (in seconds). The                     0–9999
                                     application stops scanning the object if it takes
                                                                                                        0 — The object scan time is unlimited.
                                     longer than the time specified by this setting.
                                                                                                        Default value: 0.

   SizeLimit                         Maximum size of an object to be scanned (in                        0–999999
                                     megabytes). If the object to be scanned is larger                  0 — The application scans objects of any size.
                                     than the specified value, the application skips this
                                     object.                                                            Default value: 0.




                                                                                291
         Setting                            Description                                                   Values

FirstAction             Selection of the first action to be performed by         Disinfect — The application tries to disinfect an object
                        the application on the infected objects.                and save a copy of it to Backup. If disinfection fails (for
                                                                                example, if the type of object or the type of threat in the
                                                                                object cannot be disinfected), then the application leaves
                                                                                the object unchanged. If the first action is Disinfect , it
                                                                                is recommended to specify a second action using the
                                                                                 SecondAction setting.
                                                                                Remove — The application removes the infected object
                                                                                after creating a backup copy of it.
                                                                                Recommended (perform recommended action) — The
                                                                                application automatically selects and performs an action
                                                                                on the object based on information about the threat
                                                                                detected in the object. For example, Kaspersky Endpoint
                                                                                Security immediately removes Trojans since they
                                                                                do not incorporate themselves into other files and
                                                                                therefore they do not need to be disinfected.
                                                                                 Skip — The application does not try to disinfect or delete
                                                                                infected objects. Information about the infected object
                                                                                is logged.
                                                                                Default value: Recommended .

SecondAction            Selection of the second action to be performed          The possible values of the SecondAction setting are the
                        by the application on the infected objects. The         same as those of the FirstAction setting.
                        application performs the second action if the first
                                                                                If Skip or Remove is selected as the first action, the
                        action fails.
                                                                                second action does not need to be specified.
                                                                                It is recommended to specify two actions in all
                                                                                other cases. If you have not specified the second action,
                                                                                the application applies Skip as the second action.
                                                                                Default value: Skip .

UseExcludeMasks         Uses scan exclusions for the objects specified by       Yes — Exclude objects specified by the
                        the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting.                        ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from scans.
                                                                                No (default value) — Do not exclude objects specified by
                                                                                the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the scan.

ExcludeMasks.item_#     Excludes objects from being scanned by name or          The default value is not defined.
                        mask. You can use this setting to exclude an
                                                                                   Example:
                        individual file from the specified scan scope by           UseExcludeMasks=Yes
                        name or exclude several files at once using masks          ExcludeMasks.item_0000=eicar1.*
                        in the shell format.                                       ExcludeMasks.item_0001=eicar2.*




UseExcludeThreats       Uses scan exclusions for objects containing the         Yes — Exclude objects containing the threats specified by
                        threats specified by the                                the ExcludeThreats.item_# setting from scans.
                        ExcludeThreats.item_# setting.
                                                                                No (default value) — Do not exclude objects containing
                                                                                the threats specified by the ExcludeThreats.item_#
                                                                                setting from scans.

ExcludeThreats.item_#   Excludes objects from scans by the name of the          The setting value is case-sensitive.
                        threats detected in them. Before specifying a
                                                                                The default value is not defined.
                        value for this setting, make sure that the
                        UseExcludeThreats setting is enabled.                      Example:
                                                                                   UseExcludeThreats=Yes
                        In order to exclude an object from scans, specify          ExcludeThreats.item_0000=EICAR-Test-*
                        the full name of the threat detected in this object        ExcludeThreats.item_0001=?rojan.Linux
                        – the string containing the application's decision
                        that the object is infected.
                        For example, you may be using a utility to obtain
                        information about your network. To keep the
                        application from blocking it, add the full name of
                        the threat contained in it to the list of threats
                        excluded from scans.
                        You can find the full name of the threat detected
                        in an object in the application log or on the website
                        https://threats.kaspersky.com .

UseGlobalExclusions     Enables global exclusions for scanning.                 Yes (default value) — Use the global exclusions.
                                                                                No — Do not use global exclusions.




                                                           292
           Setting                                Description                                                   Values

  ReportCleanObjects         Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about non-infected objects.
                             objects that the application reports as not being
                                                                                       No (default value) — Do not log information about non-
                             infected.
                                                                                      infected objects.
                             You can enable this setting, for example, to make
                             sure that a particular object was scanned by the
                             application.

  ReportPackedObjects        Enables logging of information about scanned             Yes — Log information about scanned objects within
                             objects that are part of compound objects.               archives.
                             You can enable this setting, for example, to make        No (default value) — Do not log information about
                             sure that an object within an archive has been           scanned objects within archives.
                             scanned by the application.

  ReportUnprocessedObjects   Enables logging of information about objects that        Yes — Log information about unprocessed objects.
                             have not been processed for some reason.
                                                                                      No (default value) — Do not log information about
                                                                                      unprocessed objects.

  UseAnalyzer                Enables heuristic analysis.                              Yes (default value) — Enable Heuristic Analyzer.
                             Heuristic analysis helps the application to detect       No — Disable Heuristic Analyzer.
                             threats even before they become known to virus
                             analysts.

  HeuristicLevel             Specifies the heuristic analysis level.                  Light — The least thorough scan with minimum load on
                             You can specify the heuristic analysis level. The        the system.
                             heuristic analysis level sets the balance between        Medium — A medium heuristic analysis level with a
                             the thoroughness of searches for threats, the load       balanced load on the system.
                             on the operating system's resources, and the scan
                                                                                      Deep — The most thorough scan with maximum load on
                             duration. The higher the heuristic analysis level, the
                                                                                      the system.
                             more resources and time are required for
                             scanning.                                                Recommended (default value) — The recommended value.

  UseIChecker                Enables usage of the iChecker technology.                Yes (default value) — Enable use of the iChecker
                                                                                      technology.
                                                                                      No — Disable use of the iChecker technology.




Custom scan of containers and images
You can perform a custom scan of the specified containers and images using the command kesl-control --
scan-container.

A custom scan is performed with the settings stored in the predefined task Custom_Container_Scan (ID: 19). You
can configure Custom Container Scan settings by editing the settings of this task. By default, the
Custom_Container_Scan task has the same settings as the Container_Scan task (ID:18).

To start the Custom Container Scan task, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --scan-container < ID/name [: tag ]>


  where < ID/name [: tag ]> is the name or ID of the container or image. You can use masks to scan multiple
  objects.



  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

  You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
  the / character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file.

  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
  the / character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/.


                                                                 293
  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

  You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.


  If there are several entities with the same name, the application scans all of them.


As a result of executing the command, a temporary containers and images scan task is created, which is
automatically deleted after completion. In this case, the scan results are output to the console.

  Examples:
  Scan the container named my_container:
  kesl-control --scan-container my_container
  Scan the image named my_image (all tags):
  kesl-control --scan-container my_image*




Integration with Jenkins
Kaspersky Endpoint Security supports integration with Jenkins. Jenkins Pipeline plug-ins can be used to scan
Docker images at different stages. For example, you can scan Docker images in a repository during the
development process or before publishing.

To integrate Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Jenkins:

 1. Install Kaspersky Endpoint Security on a Jenkins node.

 2. Install Docker Engine on a Jenkins node.
   For details, please refer to the Docker Engine documentation.

 3. Grant the Kaspersky Endpoint Security administrator privileges to the Jenkins user:
   kesl-control --grant-role admin <Jenkins user name>

 4. Add a Jenkins user to the docker group:
   sudo usermod -aG docker <Jenkins user name>
   Usually the jenkins name is used.

 5. In Jenkins, create a new build job with the test name (New Item → Enter an item name).




 6. Configure your project, according to your needs. It is assumed that as a result, you have an image or a started
    container that you need to scan.

 7. To start the Docker container, add the following script to the Jenkins build procedure. If you use Jenkins plug-
    ins or another way to start Docker containers, save the ID of the running Docker container to the file
    /tmp/kesl_cs_info, for further scanning:
   TMP_FILE="/tmp/kesl_cs_info"

                                                         294
  EXIT_CODE=0
  echo "Start container from image: '${TEST_CONTAINER_IMAGE}'"
  CONTAINER_ID=$(docker run -d -v /storage:/storage ${TEST_CONTAINER_IMAGE}
  /storage/docker_process.sh)
  if [ -z "${CONTAINER_ID}" ] ; then
  echo "Cannot start container from image ${TEST_CONTAINER_IMAGE}"
  exit 1
  fi
  echo "${CONTAINER_ID}" > ${TMP_FILE}
  exit ${EXIT_CODE}




8. After building the artifacts, add the following script to the steps to build the jenkins.
  This script supports one container for scanning. If necessary, modify the script according to your needs.
  TMP_FILE="/tmp/kesl_cs_info"
  EXIT_CODE=0
  if [ ! -f "${TMP_FILE}" ] ; then
  echo "Cannot find temporary file with container ID: '${TMP_FILE}'"
  exit 1
  fi
  CONTAINER_ID=$(cat ${TMP_FILE})
  if [ -z "${CONTAINER_ID}" ] ; then
  echo "Cannot find container ID in the temporary file: '${TMP_FILE}'"
  exit 1
  fi
  echo "Start anti-virus scan for: '${CONTAINER_ID}'"
  THREATS_AMOUNT=$(kesl-control --scan-container ${CONTAINER_ID}|grep 'Total detected
  objects'|awk '{print $5}')
  if [ "${THREATS_AMOUNT}" != "0" ] ; then
  echo "ATTENTION! ${THREATS_AMOUNT} threats detected at: '${CONTAINER_ID}'"
  EXIT_CODE=1
  else
  echo "Not threats found"
  fi
  echo "Remove container: {${CONTAINER_ID}}"

                                                         295
   docker kill ${CONTAINER_ID}
   docker rm -f ${CONTAINER_ID}
   rm -f ${TMP_FILE}

 9. To scan a Docker image from a repository, use the following script:
   DOCKER_FILE=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ianmiell/simple-
   dockerfile/master/Dockerfile
   DOCKER_FILE_FETCHED=$$.Dockerfile
   TEST_IMAGE_NAME=test_image
   echo "Build image from ${DOCKER_FILE}"
   curl ${DOCKER_FILE} -o ${DOCKER_FILE_FETCHED}
   if [ -f ${DOCKER_FILE_FETCHED} ] ; then
   echo "Dockerfile fetched: ${DOCKER_FILE_FETCHED}"
   else
   echo "Dockerfile not fetched"
   exit 1
   fi
   docker build -f ${DOCKER_FILE_FETCHED} -t ${TEST_IMAGE_NAME}
   echo "Scan docker image"
   SCAN_RESULT=$(/opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/kesl-control --scan-container
   ${TEST_IMAGE_NAME}*)
   echo "Scan done: "
   echo $SCAN_RESULT

10. Save the build job.




                                                        296
Firewall Management
A device used on local area networks (LANs) and the internet is exposed to viruses, other malware, and a variety of
attacks that exploit vulnerabilities in operating systems and software. The operating system firewall protects data
stored on the user device by blocking most threats when the device is connected to the internet or a LAN.

The operating system firewall allows you to detect all network connections on the user device and provide a list of
their IP addresses. The Firewall Management component allows you to set the status of the network connections
by configuring the network packet rules.

You can use network packet rules to specify the desired level of device protection, from fully blocking Internet
access for all applications to allowing unlimited access. All outbound connections are allowed by default, unless
corresponding blocking rules for the Firewall Management component are specified.

The Firewall Management component is disabled by default.


  It is recommended to disable other operating system firewall management tools before enabling the Firewall
  Management component.


When the Firewall Management component is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security automatically deletes all
custom rules configured for the firewall with tools provided by the operating system. These rules are not restored
after the component is disabled. If required, save the custom firewall rules before enabling the Firewall
Management component.

If firewall management is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans the operating system firewall and blocks any
attempt to change the firewall settings, for example, when an application or utility attempts to add or delete a
firewall rule. Kaspersky Endpoint Security checks the operating system firewall every 60 seconds and, if necessary.
restores the set of firewall rules created using the application. The checking period cannot be changed.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security still scans the operating system firewall when firewall management is disabled. This
allows the application to restore dynamic rules.

You can enable or disable firewall management, and also configure the following settings:

   Configure a list of network packet rules that Kaspersky Endpoint Security will apply when an attempt to
   establish a network connection is detected. You can add or remove network packet rules, and also change the
   execution priority of a network packet rule.


     In some operating systems based on the Red Hat Enterprise Linux code base, firewall rules created in the
     Kaspersky Endpoint Security application can only be viewed using a management command (kesl-
     control -F --query).


   Select default actions to perform on incoming connections and packets if no other network packet rules apply
   to this connection type.

   Map network addresses to predefined networks. You can add IP addresses or subnets to available networks and
   delete address from available networks.

   Enables or disables automatic adding of allowing rules for Network Agent ports.



                                                        297
About network packet rules
Network packet rules are actions taken by the Kaspersky Endpoint Security to allow or deny a detected network
connection attempt.

Network packet rules impose restrictions on network packets regardless of the application. Such rules restrict
inbound and outbound network traffic through specific ports of the selected data protocol.

All outbound connections are allowed by default (default action setting), unless the corresponding blocking rules
for the Firewall Management are specified. The default action is performed with the lowest priority: if no other
network packet rule has been triggered or if no network packet rules have been specified, the connection is
allowed.

Firewall Management specifies certain network packet rules by default. You can create your own network packet
rules and specify an execution priority for each network packet rule.




About dynamic rules
Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows dynamic rules to be added to, or deleted from, the firewall to ensure the
application works properly. For example, Network Agent adds dynamic rules that allow connections to Kaspersky
Security Center initiated by the application or by Kaspersky Security Center. The rules of the Anti-Cryptor are
also dynamic.

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode, dynamic rules are automatically added to the firewall
that allow connections to the SVM and Integration Server.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not control dynamic rules and does not block application components' access
to network resources. Dynamic rules do not depend on the Firewall Management component state
(enabled/disabled) or changes to the settings of the component operation. The execution priority of dynamic rules
is higher than the priority of network packet rules. The application restores a set of dynamic rules if any of them
are deleted, for example, by using the iptables utility.

You can view the set of dynamic rules (using the kesl-control -F --query command); however the dynamic
rules settings cannot be modified.




                                                       298
About the predefined available networks
An available network is a defined group of IP addresses or subnets. An available network lets you use the same
rules for several IP addresses or subnets without having to create a separate rule for each IP address or subnet. An
available network can be used as the value of the "remote address" parameter when creating a network packet rule.
Kaspersky Endpoint Security provides three predefined networks:

    Public. A network that is not protected by an anti-virus application, firewall, or filters (such as networks of
    internet cafés).

    Local. A network whose users have the right of access to files and printers on the device (such as corporate
    LANs or home networks).

    Trusted. A safe network in which the device is not exposed to attacks or unauthorized data access attempts.

You cannot create a new predefined network or delete an existing one, but you can add or remove IP addresses
and subnets from a network.




Firewall Management in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Firewall Management settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → Essential Threat Protection → Firewall Management).

Firewall Management settings

             Setting                                                              Description

  Firewall Management          This toggle button enables or disables Firewall Management.
  enabled / disabled           The toggle button is switched off by default.

  Network packet rules         Clicking the Configure network packet rules link opens the Network packet rules window. In this window, you can
                               configure the list of network packet rules that are applied by the Firewall Management component when it detects
                               the network connection attempt.

  Available networks           Clicking the Configure available networks link opens the Available networks window. In this window, you can
                               configure the list of networks that the Firewall Management component will monitor.

  Incoming connections         In this drop-down list, you can select the action to be performed for incoming network connections:
                                   Allow network connections (default value).
                                   Block network connections.

  Incoming packets             In this drop-down list you can select the action to be performed for incoming packets:
                                   Allow incoming packets (default value).
                                   Block incoming packets.

  Always add allowing rules    This check box enables or disables automatic adding allowing rules for Network Agent ports.
  for Network Agent ports      The check box is selected by default.




Network packet rules window
The Network packet rules table contains network packet rules that the Firewall Management component uses for
network activity monitoring. You can configure the settings described in the table below for network packet rules.



                                                                   299
Network packet rules settings

       Setting                                                                     Description

  Name                 Network packet rule name.

  Action               Action to be performed by Firewall Management when it detects the network activity.

  Local                Network addresses of devices that have Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed and can send and/or receive network packets.
  addresses

  Remote               Network addresses of remote devices that can send and/or receive network packets.
  addresses

  Direction            Direction of the monitored network activity.

  Protocol             Type of data transfer protocol for which network activity is monitored.

  Local ports          Port number or port range of local devices between which the connection is monitored.

  Remote ports         Port number or port range of remote devices between which the connection is monitored.

  ICMP type            ICMP type. The Firewall Management component monitors messages of the specified type sent by a host or gateway.

  ICMP code            ICMP code. The Firewall Management component monitors messages of the type specified in the ICMP type field and the
                       code specified in the ICMP code field, sent by a host or gateway.

  Logging              This column shows if the application logs actions of the network packet rule.
                       If the value is Yes, the application logs the actions of the network packet rule.
                       If the value is No, the application does not log the actions of the network packet rule.


By default, the table of network packet rules is empty.

You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down network packet rules in the table.


  Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

  This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Network packet rule window
In this window, you can configure the network packet rule.




                                                                          300
Network packet rule settings

      Setting                                                                      Description

  Rule name          The field for entering the name of the network packet rule.

  Action             In the drop-down list, you can select an action to be performed by the Firewall Management component when it detects network
                     activity:
                         Block network activity.
                         Allow network activity (default value).

  Protocol           In the drop-down list, you can select the type of data transfer protocol for which you want to monitor network activity:
                         Any (default value)
                         GRE
                         ICMP
                         ICMPv6
                         IGMP
                         TCP
                         UDP

  Specify ICMP       This check box lets you specify the ICMP type. The Firewall Management component monitors messages of the specified type
  type               sent by the host or gateway.
                     If this check box is selected, the field for entering the ICMP type is displayed.
                     This check box is displayed only if ICMP or ICMPv6 data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.
                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Specify ICMP       This check box lets you specify the ICMP code. The Firewall Management component monitors messages of the type specified in
  code               the field under the ICMP type check box, with the code specified in the field under the ICMP code check box, and sent by the
                     host or gateway.
                     If this check box is selected, the field for entering the ICMP code is displayed.
                     This check box is displayed only if ICMP or ICMPv6 data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list. It is
                     available only if the Specify ICMP type check box is selected.
                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Direction          In this drop-down list, you can specify the direction of the monitored network activity:
                         Incoming packets. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only incoming packets.
                         Incoming. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only incoming connections.
                         Incoming/Outgoing. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors both incoming and outgoing
                         connections.
                         Incoming/Outgoing packets. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors both incoming and
                         outgoing packets.
                         Outgoing packets. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only outgoing packets.
                         Outgoing. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only outgoing connections.

  Remote             In this drop-down list, you can specify network addresses of the remote devices that can send and receive network packets:
  addresses              Any address (default value). If this option is selected, the network rule controls network packets sent and received by
                         remote devices with any IP address.
                         All subnet addresses. If this option is selected, the network rule controls network packets sent and received by remote
                         devices with the IP addresses associated with the selected network type: Public networks, Local networks, or Trusted
                         networks.
                         Specified address or address range. If this option is selected, the network rule controls the sending and receiving of
                         network packets by remote devices with the IP addresses specified in the table below. You can specify multiple addresses at
                         once. In this case, enter each address on a new line to make copying easier.

  Specify            This check box allows you to specify the port numbers of the remote devices between which the connection must be monitored.
  remote ports       If this check box is selected, the field for entering port numbers is displayed.
                     You can specify a port number or port range of the remote devices between which the connection is to be monitored.
                     This check box is displayed only if TCP or UDP data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.
                     This check box is cleared by default.

  Local              In this drop-down list, you can specify the network addresses of the devices with Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed that can
  addresses          send and receive network packets:
                         Any address (default value). If this option is selected, the network rule controls sending and receiving of network packets by
                         the devices with Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed and with any IP address.
                         Specified address or address range. If this option is selected, the network rule controls the IP addresses of devices with
                         Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed, specified in the table below, that can transmit and receive network packets. You can
                         specify multiple addresses at once. In this case, enter each address on a new line to make copying easier.




                                                                          301
      Setting                                                                      Description

   Specify local     This check box allows you to specify the port numbers of the local devices between which the connection must be monitored.
   ports             If this check box is selected, the field for entering port numbers is displayed.
                     You can specify a port number or port range of the local devices between which the connection is to be monitored.
                     This check box is displayed only if TCP or UDP data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.
                     This check box is cleared by default.

   Log events        This check box lets you specify whether the actions of the network rule are recorded in the report.
                     If the check box is selected, the application writes the actions of the network rule to the report.
                     If the check box is cleared, the application does not write the actions of the network rule to the report.
                     This check box is cleared by default.




Available networks window
The Available networks table contains the networks controlled by the Firewall Management component. The table
of available networks is empty by default.

Available networks settings

      Setting                                     Description

   IP address        Network IP address.

   Network type      Network type (Public network, Local network, or Trusted network).


You can add, edit, and delete available networks.



Network connection window
In this window, you can configure the network connection that the Firewall Management component will monitor.

Network connection

      Setting                          Description

   IP address        The field for entering IP address of the network.

   Network type      You can select the type of the network:
                          Public
                          Local
                          Trusted




Firewall Management in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Firewall Management settings in the policy properties
(Application settings → Essential Threat Protection → Firewall Management).




                                                                          302
Firewall Management settings

               Setting                                                                     Description

  Enable Firewall                    This check box enables or disables Firewall Management.
  Management                         This check box is cleared by default.

  Network packet rules               This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Network packet rules
                                     window. In this window, you can configure network packet rules that are applied by the Firewall Management
                                     component when it detects the network connection attempt.

  Available networks                 This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Available networks window. In
                                     this window, you can configure the list of networks that the Firewall Management component will monitor.

  Incoming connections               In this drop-down list, you can select the action to be performed for incoming network connections:
                                         Allow network connections (default value).
                                         Block network connections.

  Incoming packets                   In this drop-down list you can select the action to be performed for incoming packets:
                                         Allow incoming packets (default value).
                                         Block incoming packets.

  Always add allowing rules          This check box enables or disables automatic adding allowing rules for Network Agent ports.
  for Network Agent ports
                                     The check box is selected by default.




Network packet rules window
The Network packet rules table contains network packet rules that the Firewall Management component uses for
network activity monitoring. You can configure the settings described in the table below for network packet rules.

Network packet rules settings

       Setting                                                                      Description

  Name                   Network packet rule name.

  Action                 Action to be performed by Firewall Management when it detects the network activity.

  Local address          Network addresses of devices that have Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed and can send and/or receive network packets.

  Remote address         Network addresses of remote devices that can send and/or receive network packets.

  Logging                This column shows if the application logs actions of the network packet rule.
                         If the value is Yes, the application logs the actions of the network packet rule.
                         If the value is No, the application does not log the actions of the network packet rule.


By default, the table of network packet rules is empty.

You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down network packet rules in the table.



Added network packet rule window
In this window, you can configure the added network packet rule settings.

Network packet rule settings

     Setting                                                                       Description

  Protocol           You can select the type of data transfer protocol for which you want to monitor network activity:
                         Any (default value)
                         GRE
                         ICMP
                         ICMPv6
                         IGMP
                         TCP
                         UDP

                                                                             303
    Setting                                                                   Description

  Direction     You can specify the direction of network activity being monitored:
                    Incoming packets. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only incoming packets.
                    Incoming. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only incoming connections.
                    Incoming/Outgoing (default setting). If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors both incoming
                    and outgoing connections.
                    Incoming/Outgoing packets. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors both incoming and
                    outgoing packets.
                    Outgoing packets. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only outgoing packets.
                    Outgoing. If this option is selected, the Firewall Management component monitors only outgoing connections.

  ICMP type     You can specify the ICMP type. The Firewall Management component monitors messages of the specified type sent by the host or
                gateway.
                If the Specified option is selected, the field for entering the ICMP type will be displayed.
                This window is displayed if the ICMP or ICMPv6 data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.

  ICMP code     You can specify the ICMP code. The Firewall Management component monitors messages of the type specified in the ICMP type
                field, with the code specified in the ICMP code field, and sent by the host or gateway.
                If the Specified option is selected, the field for entering the ICMP code will be displayed.
                This window is displayed if the ICMP or ICMPv6 data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.

  Remote        You can specify a port number or port range of the remote devices between which the connection is to be monitored.
  ports
                If the Specified option is selected, the field for entering the port numbers will be displayed.
                This window is displayed only if TCP or UDP data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.

  Local ports   You can specify a port number or port range of the local devices between which the connection is to be monitored.
                If the Specified option is selected, the field for entering the port numbers will be displayed.
                This window is displayed only if TCP or UDP data transfer protocol is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.

  Remote        You can specify the network addresses of the remote devices that can send and receive network packets:
  addresses         Any address (default value). If this item is selected, the network rule controls network packets sent and/or received by remote
                    devices with any IP address.
                    Specified address or address range. If this option is selected, the network rule controls the sending and receiving of network
                    packets by remote devices with the IP addresses that are specified in the table below. Clicking the Add button above the table
                    opens the Add IP addresses window, in which you can specify an IP address of the device, a network address, or a range of IP
                    addresses.
                    By network type. If this item is selected, the network rule controls network packets sent and received by remote devices with
                    the IP addresses associated with the selected network type: Public networks, Local networks, or Trusted networks.

  Local         You can specify the network addresses of the devices with Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed that can send and receive
  addresses     network packets:
                    Any address (default value). If this option is selected, the network rule controls network packets sent and/or received by the
                    devices with Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed regardless of their IP address.
                    Specified address or address range. If this option is selected, the network rule controls the network addresses of devices
                    with Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed that can send and receive network packets. These network addresses are specified
                    in the table below. Clicking the Add button above the table opens the Add IP addresses window, in which you can specify an IP
                    address of the device, a network address, or a range of IP addresses.

  Action        You can select an action to be performed by the Firewall Management component when it detects network activity:
                    Block network activity.
                    Allow network activity (default value).

  Logging       You can specify whether the actions of the network rule will be logged in the report.

  Rule name     The field for entering the name of the network packet rule.




Add IP addresses window
In this window, you can specify the IP address of the device, network address or range of IP addresses.

You can specify multiple addresses; enter each address on a new line for convenience of copying them.




                                                                       304
Available networks window
The Available networks table contains the networks controlled by the Firewall Management component. The table
of available networks is empty by default.

Available networks settings
      Setting                                     Description

   IP address        Network IP address.

   Network type      Network type (Public network, Local network, or Trusted network).


You can add, edit, and delete available networks.



Network connection window
In this window, you can configure the network connection that the Firewall Management component will monitor.

Network connection

      Setting                          Description

   IP address        The field for entering IP address of the network.

   Network type      You can select the type of the network:
                          Public
                          Local
                          Trusted




Firewall Management in the command line
In the command line, you can configure Firewall Management using the Firewall Management predefined task
(Firewall_Management).

By default, the Firewall Management Task is not run. You can start and stop this task manually.

You can configure the firewall management settings by editing the settings of the Firewall Management predefined
task.

You can also configure Firewall Management settings using Firewall Management commands:

    Create and delete network packet rules and change their execution priority.

    Create a list of IP addresses or subnets in network zones.

    View firewall rules created in the application by using the following command: kesl-control -F --query.




                                                                         305
Firewall Management task settings

                Setting                                   Description                                             Values

   DefaultIncomingAction                The default action to perform on an inbound       Allow (default value) — Allow inbound connections.
                                        connection if no network rules apply to this
                                                                                          Block — Block inbound connections.
                                        connection type.

   DefaultIncomingPacketAction          The default action to perform on an incoming      Allow (default value) — Allow incoming packets.
                                        packet if no network packet rules apply to this
                                                                                          Block — Block incoming packets.
                                        connection type.

   OpenNagentPorts                      Adds Network Agent dynamic rules to the           Yes (default value) – Add Network Agent dynamic
                                        network packet rules.                             rules to the network packet rules.
                                                                                          No – Do not add Network Agent dynamic rules to the
                                                                                          network packet rules.

  The [PacketRules.item_#] section contains network packet rules for the Firewall Management task. You can specify several
  [PacketRules.item_#] sections in any order. The application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.
  Each [PacketRules.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   Name                                 Network packet rule name.                         Default value: Packet rule #<n> , where n is an
                                                                                          index.

   FirewallAction                       Action to be performed on connections             Allow (default value) — Allow network connections.
                                        specified in this network packet rule.
                                                                                          Block — Block network connections.

   Protocol                             Type of protocol for which network activity is    Any (default value) — The Firewall Management task
                                        to be monitored.                                  monitors all network activity.
                                                                                          TCP
                                                                                          UDP
                                                                                          ICMP
                                                                                          ICMPv6
                                                                                          IGMP
                                                                                          GRE

   RemotePorts                          Port numbers of the remote devices whose          Any (default value) — Monitor all remote ports.
                                        connection is monitored. An integer or interval
                                                                                          0 – 65535 .
                                        can be specified for this value.
                                        This setting can only be specified if the
                                        Protocol setting is set to TCP or UDP .

   LocalPorts                           Port numbers of the local devices whose           Any (default value) — Monitor all local ports.
                                        connection is monitored. An integer or interval
                                                                                          0 – 65535 .
                                        can be specified for this value.
                                        This setting can only be specified if the
                                        Protocol setting is set to TCP or UDP .

   ICMPType                             ICMP packet type.                                 Any (default value) — Monitor all ICMP packet types.
                                        This setting can only be specified if the         Integer number according to the data transfer
                                        Protocol setting is set to ICMP or ICMPv6 .       protocol specification.

   ICMPCode                             ICMP packet code.                                 Any (default value) — Monitor all ICMP packet codes.
                                        This setting can only be specified if the         Integer number according to the data transfer
                                        Protocol setting is set to ICMP or ICMPv6 .       protocol specification.

   Direction                            Direction of the monitored network activity.      IncomingOutgoing or InOut (default value) —
                                                                                          Monitor both inbound and outbound connections.
                                                                                          Incoming or In — Monitor only inbound
                                                                                          connections.
                                                                                          Outgoing or Out — Monitor only outbound
                                                                                          connections.
                                                                                           IncomingPacket or InPacket — Monitor only
                                                                                          incoming packets.
                                                                                          OutgoingPacket or OutPacket — Monitor only
                                                                                          outgoing packets.
                                                                                          IncomingOutgoingPacket or InOutPacket —
                                                                                          Monitor both incoming and outgoing packets.




                                                                  306
             Setting                                    Description                                            Values

RemoteAddress                         The network addresses of the remote devices      Any (default value) — Monitor network packets sent
                                      that can send and receive network packets.       and/or received by remote devices with any IP
                                                                                       address.
                                                                                       Trusted — Predefined network zone for trusted
                                                                                       networks.
                                                                                       Local — Predefined network zone for local
                                                                                       networks.
                                                                                       Public — Predefined network zone for public
                                                                                       networks.
                                                                                       d.d.d.d — IPv4 address, where d is a decimal
                                                                                       number from 0 to 255.
                                                                                       dddd – dddd — Range of IPv4 addresses.
                                                                                       d.d.d.d/p — Subnet of IPv4 addresses, where p is a
                                                                                       number from 0 to 32.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — IPv6 address, where x is a
                                                                                       hexadecimal number from 0 to ffff.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x – x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — Range
                                                                                       of IPv6 addresses.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x/p — Subnet of IPv6 addresses, where p
                                                                                       is a number from 0 to 128; you can use :: for brevity.

LocalAddress                          Network addresses of devices that have           Any (default value) — Monitor network packets sent
                                      Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed and can    and/or received by local devices with any IP address.
                                      send and/or receive network packets.
                                                                                       d.d.d.d — IPv4 address, where d is a decimal
                                                                                       number from 0 to 255.
                                                                                       dddd – dddd — Range of IPv4 addresses.
                                                                                       d.d.d.d/p — Subnet of IPv4 addresses, where p is a
                                                                                       number from 0 to 32.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — IPv6 address, where x is a
                                                                                       hexadecimal number from 0 to ffff.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x – x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — Range
                                                                                       of IPv6 addresses.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x/p — Subnet of IPv6 addresses, where p
                                                                                       is a number from 0 to 128; you can use :: for brevity.

LogAttempts                           Include a record of the network rule action in   Yes — Log actions in the report.
                                      the report.
                                                                                       No (default value)—Do not write the actions in the
                                                                                       report.

The [NetworkZonesPublic] section contains network addresses associated with public networks. You can specify several IP addresses or
subnets of IP addresses.

Address.item_#                        Specifies IP addresses or subnets of IP          d.d.d.d — IPv4 address, where d is a decimal
                                      addresses.                                       number from 0 to 255.
                                                                                       d.d.d.d/p — Subnet of IPv4 addresses, where p is a
                                                                                       number from 0 to 32.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — IPv6 address, where x is a
                                                                                       hexadecimal number from 0 to ffff.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x::0/p — Subnet of IPv6 addresses, where
                                                                                       p is a number from 0 to 64.
                                                                                       Default value: "" (no network addresses in this zone)

The [NetworkZonesLocal] section contains network addresses associated with local networks. You can specify several IP addresses or
subnets of IP addresses.

Address.item_#                        Specifies IP addresses or subnets of IP          d.d.d.d — IPv4 address, where d is a decimal
                                      addresses.                                       number from 0 to 255.
                                                                                       d.d.d.d/p — Subnet of IPv4 addresses, where p is a
                                                                                       number from 0 to 32.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — IPv6 address, where x is a
                                                                                       hexadecimal number from 0 to ffff.
                                                                                       x:x:x:x::0/p — Subnet of IPv6 addresses, where
                                                                                       p is a number from 0 to 64.
                                                                                       Default value: "" (no network addresses in this zone)



                                                                307
                    Setting                                    Description                                               Values

      The [NetworkZonesTrusted] section contains network addresses associated with trusted networks. You can specify several IP addresses or
      subnets of IP addresses.

      Address.item_#                         Specifies IP addresses or subnets of IP            d.d.d.d — IPv4 address, where d is a decimal
                                             addresses.                                         number from 0 to 255.
                                                                                                d.d.d.d/p — Subnet of IPv4 addresses, where p is a
                                                                                                number from 0 to 32.
                                                                                                x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — IPv6 address, where x is a
                                                                                                hexadecimal number from 0 to ffff.
                                                                                                x:x:x:x::0/p — Subnet of IPv6 addresses, where
                                                                                                p is a number from 0 to 64.
                                                                                                Default value: "" (no network addresses in this zone)




Configuring a list of network packet rules in the command line
To add a network packet rule, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --add-rule [--name < rule name >] [--action < action >] [--protocol
  < protocol >] [--direction < direction >] [--remote < remote address >[:< port or port
  range >]] [--local < local address >[:< port or port range >]] [--at < index >]


  where:


   --name < rule name > is the name of the network packet rule.

   --action < action > is the action to be performed on connections specified in network packet rule.

   --protocol < protocol > is the type of data transfer protocol for which you want to monitor network
   activity.

   --direction < direction > is the direction of the monitored network activity.

   --remote < remote address [:< port or port range >]> is the network address of the remote device.
   You can specify the name of a predefined network zone as the remote address.

   --local < local address [:< port or port range >]> is the network address of the device with
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed.

   --at < index > is the index of rules in the list of network packet rules. If the --at option is not specified or its
   value is larger than the number of rules in the list, the new rule is added to the end of the list.

Parameters that you do not specify values for in the command are set to their default values.

  Examples:
  To create a rule that blocks all incoming and established connections to TCP port 23, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --add-rule --name Block_Telnet --action Block --direction in --protocol TCP --local any:23 --remote
  any

  To create a rule that blocks incoming and established connections via the TCP port 23 for the Public network zone, execute the following
  command:

  kesl-control --add-rule --name Block_Telnet --action Block --direction in --protocol TCP --local any:23 --remote
  Public



                                                                       308
To delete a network packet rule, execute one of the following commands:

   kesl-control --del-rule --name < rule name >

   kesl-control --del-rule --index < index >

  where:


   --name < rule name > is the name of the network packet rule.

   --index < index > is the current index of rules in the list of network packet rules.

If the list of network packet rules contains multiple rules with an identical name or does not contain a rule with a
specified name or index, an error occurs.

To change a network packet rule's execution priority, execute one of the following commands:

   kesl-control --move-rule --name < rule name > --at < index >

   kesl-control --move-rule --index < index > --at < index >

  where:


   --name < rule name > is the name of the network packet rule.

   --index < index > is the current index of rules in the list of network packet rules.

   --at < index > is the new index of rules in the list of network packet rules.



Configuring network zones in the command line
To add a network address to the zone, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --add-zone < zone > --address < address >


  where:


   < zone > is the predefined name of the network zone. Possible values: Public, Local, Trusted.

   < address > is the network address or subnet.

To delete a network address from a zone, execute one of the following commands:

   kesl-control --del-zone < zone > --address < address >

   kesl-control --del-zone < zone > --index < address index in the zone >

If a zone contains several items with the same network address, the --del-zone command will not be executed.

If the specified network address or index does not exist, an error message is generated.


                                                         309
Web Threat Protection
The Web Threat Protection component allows you to scan inbound traffic via HTTP, HTTPS, and FTP, websites, and
IP addresses, prevent malicious files from being downloaded from the Internet, and block access to phishing,
adware, and other malicious websites. Web Threat Protection uses port 9879 to intercept connections.


  Stopping or starting the application or the Web Threat Protection component terminates connections on
  intercepted ports, for example, HTTPS.


By default, the Web Threat Protection task is disabled. However, it is enabled automatically if local management of
Web Threat Protection settings has been allowed on the device (a policy is not applied or the "lock" is not set in the
policy properties) and one of the following executable browser files, including in snap format, has been detected on
the system:

   chrome

   chromium

   chromium-browser

   firefox

   firefox-esr

   google-chrome

   opera

   yandex-browser

You can enable or disable Web Threat Protection, and also configure the protection settings:

   Select action that the application performs on a web resource where a dangerous object is detected.

   Configure a list of trusted web addresses. The application will not scan the contents of websites whose web
   addresses are included in this list.

   Select objects that the application will detect when scanning inbound traffic.

   Configure the encrypted connections scan to scan HTTPS traffic.


     To scan FTP traffic, control of all network ports must be configured in the settings for the network traffic
     scan.




                                                        310
When a website is opened, the application performs the following actions:

  1. Checks the website security using the downloaded application databases.

 2. Checks the website security using heuristic analysis, if enabled.

      During heuristic analysis, Kaspersky Endpoint Security analyzes the activity of applications in the operating
      system. Heuristic analysis can detect dangerous objects for which there are currently no records in
      Kaspersky Endpoint Security databases.


 3. Checks the trustworthiness of a website using Kaspersky reputation databases if the use of Kaspersky
    Security Network is enabled.


      You are advised to enable the use of Kaspersky Security Network to help Web Threat Protection work
      more effectively.


 4. Blocks or allows opening of the website.

On attempt to open a dangerous website, the application performs the following:

   For HTTP or FTP traffic, the application blocks access and shows a warning message.

   For HTTPS traffic, a browser displays an error page.


  Removing application certificates may cause the Web Threat Protection component to work incorrectly.



  Kaspersky Endpoint Security adds a special chain of allowing rules (kesl_bypass) to the list in the mangle table
  of the iptables and ip6tables utilities. This chain of allowing rules makes it possible to exclude traffic from
  scans by the application. If traffic exclusion rules are configured in the chain, they affect the operation of the
  Web Threat Protection component.




Configuring Web Threat Protection in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Web Threat Protection settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → Essential Threat Protection → Web Threat Protection).

Web Threat Protection component settings

           Setting                                                                 Description

  Web Threat Protection        This toggle button enables or disables the Web Threat Protection component.
  enabled / disabled           The toggle button is switched off by default.

  Action on threat             In this section, you can specify the action that the application performs on the web resource where the dangerous
  detection                    object is detected:
                                   Inform the user when a dangerous object is detected in web traffic. Web Threat Protection allows this object to
                                   be downloaded to the device. At that, the application logs the information about the dangerous object and
                                   adds it to the list of active threats.
                                   Block access to all dangerous objects detected in web traffic, display a notification about the blocked access
                                   attempts, and log information about the dangerous objects (default value).

  Detect malicious objects     This check box enables or disables checking of links against the databases of malicious web addresses.
                               The check box is selected by default.

                                                                       311
           Setting                                                                           Description

  Detect phishing links        This check box enables or disables checking of links against the databases of phishing web addresses.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  Use heuristic analysis for   This check box enables or disables the use of heuristic analysis for detecting phishing links.
  detecting phishing links
                               This check box is available if the Detect phishing links check box is selected, and is selected by default.

  Detect adware                This check box enables or disables checking links against the databases of adware web addresses.
                               This check box is cleared by default.

  Detect legitimate            This check box enables or disables checking links against the databases of legitimate applications that intruders can
  applications that            use to compromise devices or data.
  intruders can use to         This check box is cleared by default.
  compromise devices or
  data

  Trusted web addresses        This table contains addresses of URLs and web pages whose content you consider trusted.
                               You can only add HTTP/HTTPS web addresses to the list of trusted web addresses.
                               You can use masks to specify web addresses. Masks are not supported to specify IP addresses.

                                 When creating an address mask, use an asterisk (*) as a placeholder for one or more characters. If you enter the *abc*
                                 address mask, it is applied to all web resources that contain the "abc" sequence (for example,
                                 www.virus.com/download_virus/page_0-9abcdef.html). To include the asterisk in the address mask as a character, but not as
                                 a mask, enter the * character twice (for example, www.virus.com/**/page_0-9abcdef.html means www.virus.com/*/page_0-
                                 9abcdef.html).


                               By default, the table is empty.
                               You can add, edit, and remove web addresses in the table.

                                 Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                 This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                 The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                 Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Web address window
In this window, you can add a web address or a web address mask to the list of trusted web addresses.

You can add only HTTP/HTTPS web addresses to the list of trusted web addresses. You can use masks to specify
web addresses. Masks are not supported to specify IP addresses.


  When creating an address mask, use an asterisk (*) as a placeholder for one or more characters. If you enter
  the *abc* address mask, it is applied to all web resources that contain the "abc" sequence (for example,
  www.virus.com/download_virus/page_0-9abcdef.html). To include the asterisk in the address mask as a
  character, but not as a mask, enter the * character twice (for example, www.virus.com/**/page_0-
  9abcdef.html means www.virus.com/*/page_0-9abcdef.html).




                                                                            312
Configuring Web Threat Protection in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Web Threat Protection settings in the policy properties
(Essential Threat Protection → Web Threat Protection).

Web Threat Protection component settings

        Setting                                                                 Description

  Enable Web Threat      This check box enables or disables Web Threat Protection.
  Protection             This check box is cleared by default.

  Trusted web            This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Trusted web addresses window, where you can
  addresses              specify the list of trusted web addresses. The application will not scan the contents of websites whose web addresses are
                         included in this list.

  Action on threat       Action that the application performs on a web resource where a dangerous object is detected:
  detection
                             Block access to all dangerous objects detected in web traffic, display a notification about the blocked access
                             attempts, and log information about the dangerous objects (default value).
                             Inform the user when a dangerous object is detected in web traffic. Web Threat Protection allows this object to be
                             downloaded to the device. At that, the application logs the information about the dangerous object and adds it to the
                             list of active threats.

  Scan settings          This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Scan settings window, where you can configure the
                         settings for scanning incoming traffic.




Trusted web addresses window
In this window, you can add web addresses and web pages whose content you consider trusted.

You can only add HTTP/HTTPS web addresses to the list of trusted web addresses. You can use masks to specify
web addresses. Masks are not supported to specify IP addresses. By default, the list is empty. You can add, edit,
and remove web addresses on the list.


  When creating an address mask, use an asterisk (*) as a placeholder for one or more characters. If you enter
  the *abc* address mask, it is applied to all web resources that contain the "abc" sequence (for example,
  www.virus.com/download_virus/page_0-9abcdef.html). To include the asterisk in the address mask as a
  character, but not as a mask, enter the * character twice (for example, www.virus.com/**/page_0-
  9abcdef.html means www.virus.com/*/page_0-9abcdef.html).




Web address window
In this window, you can add a web address or a web address mask to the list of trusted web addresses.

You can add only HTTP/HTTPS web addresses to the list of trusted web addresses. You can use masks to specify
web addresses. Masks are not supported to specify IP addresses.




                                                                     313
  When creating an address mask, use an asterisk (*) as a placeholder for one or more characters. If you enter
  the *abc* address mask, it is applied to all web resources that contain the "abc" sequence (for example,
  www.virus.com/download_virus/page_0-9abcdef.html). To include the asterisk in the address mask as a
  character, but not as a mask, enter the * character twice (for example, www.virus.com/**/page_0-
  9abcdef.html means www.virus.com/*/page_0-9abcdef.html).




Scan settings window
In this window, you can configure the settings for scanning incoming traffic during operation of the Web Threat
Protection component.

Web Threat Protection settings

                          Setting                                                               Description

  Detect malicious objects                              This check box enables or disables checking of links against the databases of malicious
                                                        web addresses.
                                                        The check box is selected by default.

  Detect phishing links                                 This check box enables or disables checking of links against the databases of phishing
                                                        web addresses.
                                                        The check box is selected by default.

  Use heuristic analysis for detecting phishing links   This check box enables or disables the use of heuristic analysis for detecting phishing
                                                        links.
                                                        This check box is available if the Detect phishing links check box is selected, and is
                                                        selected by default.

  Detect adware                                         This check box enables or disables checking links against the databases of adware web
                                                        addresses.
                                                        This check box is cleared by default.

  Detect legitimate applications that intruders can     This check box enables or disables checking links against the databases of legitimate
  use to compromise devices or data                     applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or data.
                                                        This check box is cleared by default.




Configuring Web Threat Protection in the command line
In the command line, you can manage Web Threat Protection using the Web Threat Protection predefined task
(Web_Threat_Protection).

The task starts automatically if one of the supported browsers is detected in the system and local management of
Web Threat Protection settings is allowed on the device (a policy is not applied or the "lock" is not set in the policy
properties). You can start and stop the task manually.

You can configure Web Threat Protection settings by editing the settings of the Web Threat Protection
predefined task.




                                                                   314
Web Threat Protection task settings

             Setting                                  Description                                                      Values

   ActionOnDetect                     Specifies the action to be performed upon        Notify — Allow the detected object to be downloaded, display a
                                      detection of an infected object in web          notification about the blocked access attempt, and log
                                      traffic.                                        information about the infected object.
                                                                                       Block (default value) — Block access to the detected object,
                                                                                      display a notification about the blocked access attempt, and log
                                                                                      information about the infected object.

   CheckMalicious                     Enables or disables checking of links against    Yes (default value) — Check if the links are listed in the malicious
                                      the databases of malicious web addresses.       links database.
                                                                                      No — Do not check if the links are listed in the malicious links
                                                                                      database.

   CheckPhishing                      Enables or disables checking of links against    Yes (default value) — Check if the links are listed in the phishing
                                      the databases of phishing web addresses.        links database.
                                                                                      No — Do not check if the links are listed in the phishing links
                                                                                      database.

   UseHeuristicForPhishing            Enables or disables the use of heuristic         Yes (default value) — Use heuristic analysis to detect phishing
                                      analysis for scanning web pages for             links. If this value is specified, the level of heuristic analysis is
                                      phishing links.                                  Light (the least thorough scan with minimal load on the system).
                                                                                      You cannot change the heuristic analysis level for the Web Threat
                                                                                      Protection task.
                                                                                      No — Do not use heuristic analysis to detect phishing links.

   CheckAdware                        Enables or disables checking of links against   Yes — Check if the links are listed in the adware links database.
                                      the databases of adware web addresses.
                                                                                      No (default value) — Do not check if the links are listed in the
                                                                                      adware links database.

   CheckOther                         Enables or disables the scanning of links        Yes —Check if the links are listed in the database of web
                                      against the database of web addresses           addresses that contain legal applications that may be used by
                                      containing legitimate applications that         intruders to damage your devices or data.
                                      intruders can use to compromise the
                                                                                      No (default value) — Do not check if the links are listed in the
                                      devices or data.
                                                                                      database of web addresses that contain legal applications that
                                                                                      may be used by intruders to damage your devices or data.

   UseTrustedAddresses                Enables or disables the usage of a list of      Yes (default value) — Use a list of trusted web addresses.
                                      trusted web addresses. The application
                                                                                      No — Do not use a list of trusted web addresses.
                                      does not scan trusted web addresses for
                                      viruses or other malicious objects. You can
                                      specify trusted web addresses using the
                                      TrustedAddresses.item_# setting.

   TrustedAddresses.item_#            Specifies trusted web addresses.                The default value is not defined.
                                                                                      You can use masks to specify web addresses.

                                                                                        When creating an address mask, use an asterisk (*) as a placeholder
                                                                                        for one or more characters. If you enter the *abc* address mask, it is
                                                                                        applied to all web resources that contain the "abc" sequence (for
                                                                                        example, www.virus.com/download_virus/page_0-9abcdef.html). To
                                                                                        include the asterisk in the address mask as a character, but not as a
                                                                                        mask, enter the * character twice (for example,
                                                                                        www.virus.com/**/page_0-9abcdef.html means
                                                                                        www.virus.com/*/page_0-9abcdef.html).


                                                                                      Masks are not supported to specify IP addresses.




                                                                          315
Scanning network traffic
Network traffic scan settings apply to the Web Threat Protection and Web Control components. The components
can decrypt and scan network traffic transmitted over encrypted connections. The encrypted connections scan is
enabled by default.

You can manage the following network traffic scan settings:

    Enable or disable encrypted connections scanning.

    Select the action to be performed by the application upon detection of an untrusted certificate.

    Select the action to be performed when an encrypted connections scan error occurs on a website.

    Enable or disable the use of the Internet for certificate verification.

    View and configure a list of trusted domains. The application will not scan encrypted connections established
    when visiting specified domains.

    Configure a list of root certificates that the application will consider trusted when performing an encrypted
    connections scan.

    Configure a list of network ports to be monitored by the application. You can specify the network ports or
    network port ranges to be monitored.


      If you want to intercept network connections to the NFS server, you need to make sure that the NFS
      server is started with the insecure option (so that it accepts connections from ports outside the 1–1024
      range), otherwise the NFS server may reject such connections.



  When the network traffic scan settings are changed, the application records a NetworkSettingsChanged
  event in the log file.




Configuring network traffic scanning in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure network traffic scan settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → General settings → Network settings).

Encrypted connections scan settings

               Setting                                                                 Description

  Encrypted connections scan is       This toggle switch enables or disables the encrypted connections scan.
  enabled / disabled                  The check toggle button is switched on by default.

  Trusted root certificates           Contains the Manage trusted root certificates link, which opens the Trusted root certificates window. In
                                      this window, you can configure the list of trusted root certificates. The list is used when scanning encrypted
                                      connections.

  Visiting a domain with an           You can select the action that the application performs when a domain with an untrusted certificate is
  untrusted certificate               visited:
                                          Allow (default value) — Allow connecting to the domain with an untrusted certificate.
                                          Block — Block connection to the domain with an untrusted certificate.


                                                                     316
               Setting                                                                Description

  Visiting a domain with an         You can select the action that the application performs when a domain with an encrypted connections scan
  encrypted connections scan        error is visited:
  error
                                        Allow and add domain to exclusions (default value) — Add the domain that resulted in the error to the
                                        list of domains with scan errors and do not scan encrypted network traffic when this domain is visited.
                                        Block — Block connection to the domain with a scan error.

  Certificate verification policy   You can select how the application verifies certificates:
                                        Local check: the application does not use the internet to validate a certificate.
                                        Full check (default value): the application uses the internet to check and download the missing chains
                                        that are needed to verify a certificate.

  Trusted domains                   Contains the Configure trusted domains link, which opens the Trusted domains window. In this window, you
                                    can configure the list of trusted domain names.

  Monitored ports                   Contains network port monitoring settings:
                                        Monitor all network ports. If this option is selected, the application monitors all network ports.
                                        Monitor selected network ports only. If this option is selected, the application monitors only the
                                        network ports specified in the Monitored ports window. This option is selected by default.
                                    Clicking the Configure network port settings link opens the Monitored ports window, where you can
                                    specify the network ports to be monitored by the application.




Trusted certificates window
You can configure a list of root certificates considered trusted by Kaspersky Endpoint Security. The list of trusted
root certificates is used when scanning encrypted connections.

The following information is displayed for each certificate:

   certificate subject

   certificate serial number

   certificate issuer

   certificate start date

   certificate expiration date

   SHA256 certificate fingerprint

By default, the certificate list is empty.

You can add and remove certificates.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




Adding a trusted certificate window
In this window, you can add a certificate to the list of trusted certificates.


                                                                   317
The Add certificate link opens the standard file selection window. Indicate the path to the file that contains the
certificate, in DER or PEM format.

After the certificate file is selected, the window displays certificate information and the file path.



Trusted domains window
This list contains the domain names and domain name masks that will be excluded from scanning. The application
does not scan connections established when visiting specified domains.

Example: *example.com. For example, *example.com/* is incorrect because a domain address, not a web page,
needs to be specified.

By default, the list is empty.

You can add, edit, or remove domains from the list of trusted domains.



Monitored ports
The table contains network ports that the application must monitor if in the Network settings window, under
Monitored port, the Monitor selected network ports only option is selected.

The table contains two columns:

   Port – monitored port.

   Description – description of the monitored port.

By default, the table displays a list of network ports that are usually used for the transmission of mail and network
traffic. The list of network ports is included in the application package.

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




                                                           318
Configuring network traffic scanning in the
Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure network traffic scan settings in the policy properties (General
settings → Network settings).

Encrypted connections scan settings

               Setting                                                                  Description

  Enable encrypted connections        This check box enables or disables the encrypted connections scan.
  scan                                The check box is selected by default.

  Visiting a domain with an           In the drop-down list, you can select the action that the application performs when a domain with an
  untrusted certificate               untrusted certificate is visited:
                                          Allow (default value) — Allow connecting to the domain with an untrusted certificate.
                                          Block — Block connection to the domain with an untrusted certificate.

  Visiting a domain with an           In the drop-down list, you can select the action that the application performs when a domain with an
  encrypted connections scan          encrypted connections scan error is visited:
  error
                                          Allow and add domain to exclusions (default value) — Add the domain that resulted in the error to the
                                          list of domains with scan errors and do not scan encrypted network traffic when this domain is visited.
                                          Block — Block connection to the domain with a scan error.

  Certificate verification policy     In the drop-down list, you can select how the application verifies certificates:
                                          Local check: the application does not use the internet to validate a certificate.
                                          Full check (default value): the application uses the internet to check and download the missing chains
                                          that are needed to verify a certificate.

  Trusted domains                     This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Trusted domains window, where you
                                      can configure the list of trusted domain names.

  Trusted root certificates           This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Trusted root certificates window,
                                      where you can configure the list of trusted root certificates. The list is used when scanning encrypted
                                      connections.

  Network ports settings              This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Monitored ports
                                      window.




Trusted domains window
This list contains the domain names and domain name masks that will be excluded from scanning. The application
does not scan connections established when visiting specified domains.

Example: *example.com. For example, *example.com/* is incorrect because a domain address, not a web page,
needs to be specified.

By default, the list is empty. You can add, edit, or remove domains from the list of trusted domains.



Trusted certificates window
You can configure a list of root certificates considered trusted by Kaspersky Endpoint Security. The list of trusted
root certificates is used when scanning encrypted connections.




                                                                     319
The following information is displayed for each certificate:

    certificate subject

    certificate serial number

    certificate issuer

    certificate start date

    certificate expiration date

    SHA256 certificate fingerprint

By default, the certificate list is empty.

You can add and remove certificates.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




Adding certificate window
In this window, you can add a certificate to the trusted certificate list in one of the following ways:

    Indicate the path to the certificate file. The Browse button opens the standard file selection window. Indicate
    the path to the file that contains the certificate, in DER or PEM format.

    Copy the contents of the certificate file to the Enter certificate details field.




Monitored ports
Network ports settings

           Setting                                                                   Description

  Monitor all network ports   If this option is selected, the application monitors all network ports.

  Monitor selected            If this option is selected, the application monitors only the network ports specified in the table.
  network ports only          This option is selected by default.

  Network ports settings      This table contains network ports monitored by the application if the Monitor selected network ports only option is
                              selected. The table contains two columns:
                                   Port – monitored port.
                                   Description – description of the monitored port.
                              By default, the table displays a list of network ports that are usually used for the transmission of mail and network
                              traffic. The list of network ports is included in the application package.
                              You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.




                                                                       320
Configuring network traffic scanning on the command
line
On the command line, you can use special management commands to manage network traffic scan settings. You
can use network traffic scan settings management commands to:

   Manage network traffic scan settings.

   View exclusions from the encrypted connections scan.

   Clear the list of domains that the application automatically excluded from the scan.

   Configure the list of trusted root certificates that the application uses when scanning network traffic.



Viewing and editing settings for encrypted connections scan
You can use special network traffic scan settings management commands to:

   Output the current values of network traffic scan settings to the console or to a configuration file. You can use
   this file to edit the settings.

   Manage all network traffic scan settings using the configuration file. You can get a configuration file that you
   can edit using the display the network traffic scan settings output command.

   Edit individual settings using command line options in the format < setting name >=< setting value >. You
   can get the current values of the settings using the command to output network traffic scan settings.

To output the current network traffic scan settings to the console, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-net-settings [--json]


  where --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the
  settings are output in the INI format.


To output the current network traffic scan settings to a file, run the following command:

  kesl-control --get-net-settings --file < path to the configuration file > [--json]


  where:


   --file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file to which you want to save the
   network traffic scan settings. If you specify the name of a file without specifying its path, the file will be created
   in the current directory. If a file with the specified name already exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten.
   If the specified directory cannot be found on the disk, file will not be created.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings
   are output in the INI format.

                                                          321
To manage network scan settings using a configuration file:

 1. Output the network traffic scan settings to the configuration file, as described above.

 2. Edit the values of the necessary parameters in the file and save the changes.

 3. Execute the command:
   kesl-control --set-net-settings --file < path to configuration file > [--json]
   where:

      --file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file with network traffic scan
      settings.

      --json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file into the application in JSON format. If
      the --json option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an
      error is displayed.

  All network traffic scan settings configured in the file are imported into the application.


To edit network traffic scan settings on the command line, run the following command:

  kesl-control --set-net-settings < setting name >=< setting value > [< setting name >=
  < setting value >]


  where < setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the network traffic scan
  settings.


  The values of the specified settings are modified.



Viewing exclusions from encrypted connections scan
You can view the following lists of exclusions from the encrypted connections scan:

   a list of exclusions added by the user;

   a list of exclusions added by the application;

   list of exclusions received from the application databases.

To view the list of encrypted connections scan exclusions added by a user, execute the following command:

  kesl-control -N --query user


To view the list of encrypted connections scan exclusions added by a user, execute the following command:

  kesl-control -N --query auto




                                                         322
To view the list of secured connection scan exclusions received from the application databases, execute the
following command:

  kesl-control -N --query kl


To clear a list of domains that the application automatically excluded from scan, execute the following command:

  kesl-control [-N] --clear-web-auto-excluded



Managing the list of trusted root certificates
To add a certificate to the list of trusted root certificates, run the following command:

  kesl-control --add-certificate < path to certificate >


  where:


  < path to certificate > is the path to the certificate file that you want to add (PEM or DER format).


To remove a certificate from the list of trusted root certificates, run the following command:

  kesl-control --remove-certificate < certificate subject >


To view the list of trusted root certificates, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --list-certificates


The following information is displayed for each certificate:

   certificate subject

   serial number

   certificate issuer

   certificate start date

   certificate expiration date

   SHA256 certificate fingerprint




                                                        323
Network Threat Protection
The Network Threat Protection component allows you to scan inbound network traffic for activity that is typical
for network attacks.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security receives TCP port numbers from the current application databases and scans
incoming traffic for these ports. Network Threat Protection uses port 9789 to intercept connections.


  To scan network traffic, the Network Threat Protection task receives port numbers from the application
  databases and accepts connections via all these ports. During the network scan process, it may look like an
  open port on the device, even if no application on the system is listening to this port. It is recommended to
  close unused ports by means of a firewall.


Current connections for intercepted TCP ports are reset when Network Threat Protection is enabled.

If Network Threat Protection is enabled, upon detecting an attempted network attack on a protected device, the
application blocks network activity from the attacking device and creates the Network attack detected event. The
event contains information about the attacking device.

By default, network traffic from the attacking device is blocked for one hour. Once the blocking time has expired,
the application unblocks the device.

Network Threat Protection is enabled by default if the Network Threat Protection settings on the device are
defined through a policy. If locally configured settings are applied on the device, Network Threat Protection is
disabled by default.

You can enable or disable Network Threat Protection, and also configure the protection settings:

   Select the action that the application will perform upon detection of network activity that is typical of network
   attacks.

   Enables or disables the blocking of network activity when a network attack attempt is detected.

   Set the duration for blocking an attacking device.

   Configure a list of IP addresses whose network activity will not be blocked by the application.

You can use the commands for administering blocked devices in the command line to view the list of blocked
devices and manually unblock these devices. Kaspersky Security Center does not provide tools for monitoring and
managing blocked devices, except for the Network attack detected events.


  Kaspersky Endpoint Security adds a special chain of allowing rules (kesl_bypass) to the list in the mangle table
  of the iptables and ip6tables utilities. This chain of allowing rules makes it possible to exclude traffic from
  scans by the application. If traffic exclusion rules are configured in the chain, they affect the operation of the
  Network Threat Protection component. For example, to exclude incoming and outgoing HTTP traffic, you need
  to add a rule by running the following command: iptables -t mangle -I kesl_bypass -m tcp -p tcp
  --dport http -j ACCEPT.




                                                        324
Configuring Network Threat Protection in the Web
Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Network Threat Protection settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → Essential Threat Protection → Network Threat Protection).

Network Threat Protection component settings

               Setting                                                                            Description

  Network Threat Protection           This toggle button enables or disables Network Threat Protection.
  enabled / disabled                  The check toggle button is switched on by default.

  Action on threat detection          Actions performed upon detection of network activity that is typical of network attacks.
                                           Inform user. The application allows network activity and logs information about detected network activity.
                                           Block network activity from an attacking device and log information about detected network activity
                                           (default value).

  Blocking attacking devices          This toggle button enables or disables blocking network activity when a network attack attempt is detected.
  enabled / disabled
                                      The check toggle button is switched on by default.

  Block the attacking device for      In this field you can specify the duration an attacking device is blocked in minutes. After the specified time,
  (min)                               Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows network activity from this device.
                                      Available values: integer from 1 to 32768.
                                      Default value: 60.

  Exclusions                          The table contains a list of IP addresses. Network attacks from these addresses will not be blocked. By default,
                                      the list is empty.
                                      You can add, edit, and remove IP addresses in the table. You can specify IP addresses in IPv4 and IPv6 formats.

                                         Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                         This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                         The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                         Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




IP address window
In this window, you can add and edit IP addresses. Network attacks from these IP addresses will not be blocked by
Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

IP addresses
        Setting                                 Description

  Enter an IP address    Entry field for an IP address.
                         You can specify IP addresses in IPv4 and IPv6 formats.




                                                                             325
Configuring Network Threat Protection in the
Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Network Threat Protection settings in the policy properties
(Essential Threat Protection → Network Threat Protection).

Network Threat Protection component settings

           Setting                                                                    Description

  Enable Network Threat         This check box enables or disables Network Threat Protection.
  Protection                    The check box is selected by default.

  Action on threat              Actions performed upon detection of network activity that is typical of network attacks.
  detection
                                    Inform user. The application allows network activity and logs information about detected network activity.
                                    Block network activity from an attacking device and log information about detected network activity (default
                                    value).

  Block attacking devices       This check box enables or disables the blocking of network activity when a network attack attempt is detected.
                                The check box is selected by default.

  Block the attacking           In this field you can specify the duration an attacking device is blocked in minutes. After the specified time, Kaspersky
  device for (min)              Endpoint Security allows network activity from this device.
                                Available values: integer from 1 to 32768.
                                Default value: 60.

  Exclusions                    This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions window, where you can specify a
                                list of IP addresses. Network attacks from these IP addresses will not be blocked.




Exclusions window
In this window, you can add IP addresses from which network attacks will not be blocked.

By default, the list is empty.

You can add, edit, and remove IP addresses in the list. You can specify IP addresses in IPv4 and IPv6 formats.



IP address window
In this window, you can add and edit IP addresses. Network attacks from these IP addresses will not be blocked by
Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

IP addresses

        Setting                                 Description

  Enter an IP address     Entry field for an IP address.
                          You can specify IP addresses in IPv4 and IPv6 formats.




                                                                         326
Configuring Network Threat Protection in the command
line
In the command line, you can manage Network Threat Protection using the Network Threat Protection predefined
task (Network_Threat_Protection).

By default, the Network Threat Protection task does not run. You can start and stop the task manually.

You can configure Network Threat Protection settings by editing the settings of the Network Threat Protection
predefined task.

Network Threat Protection task settings

           Setting                                  Description                                                     Values

   ActionOnDetect               Action performed when network activity typical of     Notify – allow network activity, log information about
                                network attacks is detected.                          detected network activity. If this value is specified, the value of
                                Changing the value of this setting from Block to      the BlockAttackingHosts parameter is ignored.
                                Notify clears the list of blocked devices.             Block (default value) – block network activity and log
                                                                                      information about it.

   BlockAttackingHosts          Blocking network activity from attacking devices.     Yes (default value) — Block network activity of an attacking
                                                                                      device.
                                                                                      No – Do not block network activity of the attacking device. If
                                                                                      this value is specified and the ActionOnDetect parameter is
                                                                                      set to Block , the application blocks network activity from the
                                                                                      attacking device, but does not add the device to the list of
                                                                                      blocked devices.

   BlockDurationMinutes         Specifies how long attacking devices will be          1 – 32768
                                blocked (in minutes).                                 Default value: 60.

   UseExcludeIPs                The usage of a list of IP addresses whose network     Yes — Use the list of excluded IP addresses.
                                activity will not be blocked when a network attack
                                                                                      No (default value) — Do not use the list of excluded IP
                                is detected. The application will only log
                                                                                      addresses.
                                information about dangerous activity from these
                                devices.
                                You can add IP addresses to the exclusion list by
                                using the ExcludeIPs.item_# setting.

   ExcludeIPs.item_#            Specifies an IP address whose network activity will   d.d.d.d — IPv4 address, where d is a decimal number from 0
                                not be blocked by the application. By default, the    to 255.
                                list is empty.
                                                                                      d.d.d.d/p — Subnet of IPv4 addresses, where p is a number
                                                                                      from 0 to 32.
                                                                                      x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x — IPv6 address, where x is a hexadecimal
                                                                                      number from 0 to ffff.
                                                                                      x:x:x:x::0/p — Subnet of IPv6 addresses, where p is a
                                                                                      number from 0 to 64.
                                                                                      The default value is not defined.




                                                                        327
Protection against remote malicious
encryption
Anti-Cryptor component allows you to protect your files in local directories with network access by SMB/NFS
protocols from remote malicious encryption.


  To use the component, a license that includes the corresponding function is required.


If Anti-Cryptor is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans the actions of remote devices with file resources
located in shared network directories of the protected device for the presence of malicious encryption. If an
application considers the actions of a remote device accessing shared network resources to be malicious
encryption, the application creates and enables a rule for the firewall of the operating system that blocks network
traffic from the compromised device. The compromised device is added to the list of untrusted devices, and
access to shared network directories is blocked for all untrusted devices. The application creates an Encryption
detected event that contains information about the compromised device.

By default, the application blocks access of untrusted devices to network file resources for 30 minutes. When the
blocking time expires, the application deletes the compromised device from the list of untrusted devices, and the
device's access to network file resources is automatically restored.


  Firewall rules created by the Anti-Cryptor component cannot be deleted using the iptables utility, since the
  application restores a set of rules every minute.


Protection against remote malicious encryption is disabled by default.

You can enable or disable protection against malicious encryption (Anti-Cryptor), and also configure the
protection settings:

   Select the action that the application will perform when encryption is detected: notify the user or block the
   device performing the malicious encryption.
   If the Inform action is selected, the application still scans remote devices' actions on network file shares to
   check for malicious encryption when Anti-Cryptor is enabled. If malicious activity is detected, the Encryption
   detected event is created, but the compromised device is not blocked.

   Set the duration for blocking an untrusted device.

   Specify the files and directories that the application protects against malicious encryption.

   Specify the files and directories that are excluded from protection against malicious encryption.
   The application does not consider actions to be encryption if encryption activity is detected in directories
   excluded from protection against encryption (Anti-Cryptor).

You can use the commands for administering blocked devices in the command line to view the list of blocked
devices and manually unblock these devices. Kaspersky Security Center does not provide tools for monitoring and
managing blocked devices, except for the Encryption detected events.


  For the Anti-Cryptor component to operate correctly, at least one of the services (Samba or NFS) must be
  installed in the operating system. The NFS service requires the rpcbind package to be installed.

                                                        328
The Anti-Cryptor component runs correctly with SMB1, SMB2, SMB3, NFS3, TCP/UDP, and IP/IPv6 protocols.
Working with NFS2 and NFS4 protocols is not supported. It is recommended to configure your server settings so
that the NFS2 and NFS4 protocols cannot be used to mount resources.


  Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not block access to network file resources until the device's activity is
  identified as malicious. So, at least one file will be encrypted before the application detects malicious activity.




Configuring Anti-Cryptor in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Anti-Cryptor settings in the policy properties (Application settings →
Advanced Threat Protection → Anti-Cryptor).

Anti-Cryptor component settings

               Setting                                                                    Description

  Anti-Cryptor protection            This toggle switch enables or disables the protection of files in the local directories with network access by
  enabled / disabled                 SMB/NFS protocols from remote malicious encrypting.
                                     The toggle button is switched off by default.

  Protection scopes                  Clicking the Configure protection scopes link opens the Protection scopes window.

  Action on encryption               The action to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security upon detecting malicious encryption:
  detection
                                          Inform user. Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not block the device performing encryption; it only records in
                                          the event log an event about the detection of malicious encryption.
                                          Block the device performing encryption (default value).

  Block untrusted host for           In this field you can specify the untrusted host blocking duration in minutes.
  (min)
                                     If a compromised host is blocked and you change this setting value, the blocking time for this host will not change.
                                     The blocking time is not a dynamic value, and it is calculated at the moment of blocking.
                                     Available values: integer from 1 to 4294967295.
                                     Default value: 30.

  Exclusions                         Clicking the Configure exclusions link opens the Exclusion scopes window.

  Exclusions by mask                 Clicking the Configure exclusions by mask link opens the Exclusions by mask window.




Protection scopes window
The table contains protection scopes of the Anti-Cryptor component. The application will scan files and
directories located in the paths specified in the table. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes
all directories of the local file system.

Protection scope settings

  Setting                                     Description

  Scope name         Protection scope name.

  Path               Path to the directory that the application protects.

  Status             The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


  Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.



                                                                            329
  This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



Add protection scope window
In this window, you can add or configure protection scope for the Anti-Cryptor component.

Protection scope settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  Scope name                Field for entering the protection scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Protection scopes window.
                            The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope            This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                            If this check box is selected, the application processes this protection scope during the component operation.
                            If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this protection scope during the component operation.
                            You can later include this scope in the component operation settings by selecting the check box.
                            The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access       You can select the type of file system in the drop-down list:
  protocol, and path
                                Local (default value) – local directories.
                                Shared displays server file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                                All shared displays all server file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol           You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                                NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                                Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                            This drop-down list is available if the Shared option is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                      330
           Setting                                                                           Description

  Path                      The entry field for specifying the path to the directory that you want to include in the protection scope. You can use
                            masks to specify the path.

                               You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                               You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                               the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                               You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                               character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                               The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                               You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                            This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.
                            The field must not be blank.
                            By default, the / path is specified (root directory).

  Masks                     This list contains name masks of the objects that the application scans during operation of the Anti-Cryptor
                            component.
                            By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                            You can add, edit, or delete masks.

                               Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                               This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                               The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                               Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings
           Setting                                       Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.




                                                                             331
  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                 Description

  Exclusion scope name     Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                           The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope           This check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope when the application is running.
                           If the check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from scan or protection during its operation.
                           If the check box is cleared, the application includes this scope in scan or protection during its operation. You can later
                           exclude this scope from scan or protection by selecting the check box.
                           The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access      In this drop-down list, you can select the type of file system where the directories that you want to add to scan
  protocol, and path       exclusions are located:
                               Local, for local directories.
                               Mounted, for remote directories mounted on the device.
                               All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol          You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                               NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                               Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                               Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                           This drop-down list is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.




                                                                     332
        Setting                                                                 Description

Path              Entry field for the path to the directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to
                  specify the path.


                    You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                         [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                    You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >], [image-
                    id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                    Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                    For example:

                         [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                         [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                         directory >

                         [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                         < name >]/< path to local directory >

                    You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                    You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                    You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                    the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                    You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                    character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                    The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                    To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                    The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                    mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                    You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                  The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.
                  This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

Name of shared    The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
resource          exclusion scope are located.
                  The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is selected
                  in the Access protocol drop-down list.

Masks             The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                  in the directory specified in the Path field.
                  By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                  You can add, edit, or delete masks.




                                                                333
Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

     Examples:
     The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
     The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
     characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Configuring Anti-Cryptor in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Anti-Cryptor settings in the policy properties (Advanced Threat
Protection → Anti-Cryptor).

Anti-Cryptor component settings

       Setting                                                                 Description

  Enable Anti-         This check box enables or disables the protection of files in local directories with network access by SMB/NFS protocols from
  Cryptor              remote malicious encryption.
                       This check box is cleared by default.

  Protection           This group of settings contains buttons that open windows where you can configure the scan scopes and protection settings.
  scopes

  Exclusions           This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this
                       window, you can define the list of scopes to be excluded from scans.

  Exclusions by        This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
  mask                 configure the exclusion of objects from scans by name mask.




Scan scopes window
The table contains the scan scopes. The application will scan files and directories located in the paths specified in
the table. By default, the table contains one scan scope that includes all directories of the local file system.
                                                                      334
Scan scope settings

     Setting                               Description

  Scope name      Scan scope name.

  Path            Path to the directory that the application scans.

  Status          The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


  Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of
  scan scopes. If you want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security
  settings of the parent directory, you must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

  This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add or configure protection scope for the Anti-Cryptor component.




                                                                      335
Protection scope settings

           Setting                                                                           Description

  Scope name                     Field for entering the protection scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope                 This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                                 If this check box is selected, the application processes this protection scope during the component operation.
                                 If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this protection scope during the component operation.
                                 You can later include this scope in the component operation settings by selecting the check box.
                                 The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access            The settings block lets you set the scan scope.
  protocol, and path             You can select the file system type in the drop-down list of file systems:
                                      Local, for local directories.
                                      Shared displays server file system resources accessible via the Samba or NFS protocol.
                                      All shared (default value) displays all server file system resources accessible via the Samba and NFS protocols.

                                   If Shared is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in the drop-
                                   down list on the right:
                                        NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                                        Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.

                                   If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                                   that you want to add to the protection scope. You can use masks to specify the path.

                                     You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                     You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                     in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                     You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                     character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                     The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                     To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                                     The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                                     mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                                     You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                   The field must not be blank.

  Masks                          This list contains name masks of the objects that the application scans during operation of the Anti-Cryptor
                                 component.
                                 By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                 You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Protection settings window
Protection settings

        Setting                                                                           Description

  Action on                 The action to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security upon detecting malicious encryption:
  encryption                    Inform user. Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not block the device performing encryption; it only records in the event
  detection
                                log an event about the detection of malicious encryption.
                                Block the device performing encryption (default value).

  Block untrusted           In this field you can specify the untrusted host blocking duration in minutes. After the specified time, Kaspersky Endpoint
  host for (min)            Security removes the untrusted devices from the list of blocked devices. The access of the host to network file resources is
                            restored automatically, after it is deleted from the list of untrusted hosts.
                            If a compromised host is blocked and you change this setting value, the blocking time for this host will not change. The
                            blocking time is not a dynamic value, and it is calculated at the moment of blocking.
                            Possible values: integers from 1 to 2,147,483,647.
                            Default value: 30.


                                                                              336
Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                    Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan exclusion scopes.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name       Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                             The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope             The check box enables or disables exclusion of the scope from scan when the application is running.
                             If this check box is selected, the application excludes this area during scans.
                             If this check box is cleared, the application includes this area in the scan scope. You can later exclude this scope by
                             selecting the check box.
                             The check box is selected by default.




                                                                       337
        Setting                                                                   Description

File system, access   The settings block lets you set the exclusion scope.
protocol, and path
                      In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system of the directories to be excluded from
                      scans:
                          Local, for local directories.
                          Mounted – mounted directories.
                          All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

                       If Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in the drop-
                       down list on the right:
                           NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                           Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                           Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.

                       If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a directory
                       that you want add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks and tags to specify the path.


                         You can use special tags to specify a container or image:

                              [container-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can also use unique combinations of the [container-id:< identifier >], [container-name:< name >],
                         [image-id:< identifier >] and [image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory > tags.

                         Any combination of 1 to 4 unique tags within one area is allowed. The order they are listed in is not important.

                         For example:

                              [container-name:< name >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local directory >

                              [image-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >]/< path to local directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:< name >]/< path to local
                              directory >

                              [container-name:< name >][image-id:< identifier >][container-id:< identifier >][image-name:
                              < name >]/< path to local directory >

                         You can use masks ( ? and * characters) in names and identifiers.




                         You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                         You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                         in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                         You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                         character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                         The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                         To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                         The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                         mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                         You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                       The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

Filesystem name       The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you want to add to the exclusion scope
                      are located.
                      The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                      selected in the drop-down list on the right.




                                                                   338
          Setting                                                                     Description

  Masks                      The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan. Masks are only applied to objects
                             in the directory specified in the path field.
                             By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                             You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from scans based on name mask. The application will not scan files
whose names contain the specified mask. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected name mask of files
  excluded from a scan.

  This button is available if at least one file mask is selected in the list.



  Clicking the mask opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
  modify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Configuring Anti-Cryptor in the command line
In the command line, you can manage Anti-Cryptor using the Anti-Cryptor task (Anti_Cryptor).

By default, the Anti-Cryptor task does not run. You can start and stop this task manually.

You can configure Anti-Cryptor settings by editing the settings of the Anti-Cryptor predefined task.




                                                                        339
Anti-Cryptor task settings

           Setting                                       Description                                                      Values

   ActionOnDetect              Enables untrusted hosts blocking.                                  Block (default value) – enable untrusted hosts
                                                                                                  blocking.
                                                                                                  Notify : disable untrusted hosts blocking.

   BlockTime                   The time in minutes for which an untrusted device is blocked.      Integer from 1 to 4294967295.
                               If a compromised host is blocked, and you change a value for       Default value: 30.
                               the BlockTime setting, the blocking time for this host will
                               not change. The blocking time is not a dynamic value, and is
                               calculated at the moment of blocking.

   UseExcludeMasks             Enables exclusion of the objects specified by the                  Yes — Exclude the objects specified by the
                               ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the protection scope.             ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the protection
                               This setting only applies if a value is specified for the          scope.
                               ExcludeMasks.item_# setting.                                       No (default value) — Do not exclude the objects
                                                                                                  specified by the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting
                                                                                                  from the protection scope.

   ExcludeMasks.item_#         Excludes objects from the protection scope by names or             The default value is not defined.
                               masks. You can use this setting to exclude an individual file
                               from the specified protection scope by name or exclude
                               multiple files at the same time using masks in the shell format.
                               Before specifying a value for this setting, make sure that the
                               UseExcludeMasks setting is enabled.
                               If you want to specify several masks, specify each mask on a
                               new line with a new index.

  The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the scopes protected by the application. For the Anti-Cryptor task, you need to specify at least one
  protection scope; you can only specify shared directories.
  You can specify several [ScanScope.item_#] sections in any order. The application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.
  The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   AreaDesc                    Description of protection scope; contains additional               Default value: All shared directories .
                               information about the protection scope.

   UseScanArea                 Enables protection of the specified scope. To run the task,        Yes (default value) — Protect the specified scope.
                               enable protection of at least one scope.
                                                                                                  No — Do not protect the specified scope.

   AreaMask.item_#             Protection scope limitation. In the protection scope, the          Default value: * (protect all objects)
                               application protects only the objects that are specified using
                               the masks in the shell format.
                               You can specify several AreaMask.item_# items in any
                               order. The application processes the scopes by index in
                               ascending order.




                                                                          340
        Setting                                      Description                                                       Values

Path                        Path to the directory with the objects to be protected.          < path to local directory > – Protect a local
                                                                                             directory accessible via SMB/NFS. You can use
                                                                                             masks to specify the path.

                                                                                               You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file
                                                                                               or directory name mask.

                                                                                               You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                               set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
                                                                                               the / character in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                               example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                               You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                               represent any set of characters (including an empty
                                                                                               set and the / character) in the file or directory name.
                                                                                               For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                               The ** mask can be used only once in a directory
                                                                                               name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect
                                                                                               mask.

                                                                                               You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                               character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                             AllShared (default value) — Protect all resources
                                                                                             accessible via SMB/NFS.
                                                                                             Shared:SMB — Protect resources accessible via
                                                                                             SMB.
                                                                                             Shared:NFS — Protect resources accessible via
                                                                                             NFS.

The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the objects to be excluded from all [ScanScope.item_#] sections. The objects that
match the rules of any [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section are not scanned. The format of the [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section
is similar to the format of the [ScanScope.item_#] section. You can specify several [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] sections in any order. The
application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.
The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                    Description of the protection exclusion scope, which             Default value: All objects .
                            contains additional information about the exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                 Excludes the specified scope from protection.                    Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope
                                                                                             from protection.
                                                                                             No — Do not exclude the specified scope from
                                                                                             protection.

AreaMask.item_#             Limitation of the protection exclusion scope. In the exclusion   Default value: * (exclude all objects).
                            scope, the application excludes only the objects that are
                            specified using masks in the shell format.
                            You can specify several AreaMask.item_# items in any
                            order. The application processes the scopes by index in
                            ascending order.




                                                                     341
       Setting                           Description                                                      Values

Path             Path to the directory with objects excluded from protection.    < path to local directory > — Exclude objects
                                                                                in the specified directory from protection. You can
                                                                                use masks to specify the path.

                                                                                  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file
                                                                                  or directory name mask.

                                                                                  You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                  set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
                                                                                  the / character in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                  example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                  represent any set of characters (including an empty
                                                                                  set and the / character) in the file or directory name.
                                                                                  For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory
                                                                                  name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect
                                                                                  mask.

                                                                                  You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                  character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                Mounted:NFS – Exclude the remote directories
                                                                                mounted on a client device using the NFS protocol
                                                                                from protection.
                                                                                Mounted:SMB – Exclude the remote directories
                                                                                mounted on a client device using the Samba protocol
                                                                                from protection.
                                                                                AllRemoteMounted – Exclude all remote directories
                                                                                mounted on a client device using the Samba and NFS
                                                                                protocols from protection.




                                                        342
Managing blocked devices
While protecting a device against network threats and remote malicious encryption, Kaspersky Endpoint Security
can block remote devices whose actions are considered to be malicious:

   If malicious encryption is detected, the application blocks access of the remote device to the shared network
   directories of the protected device.

   Upon detecting network attack attempts on the protected device, the application blocks network traffic from
   the attacking device.

You can change the blocking duration in the Network Threat Protection and Protection Against Remote Malicious
Encryption settings. Once the specified period of time has elapsed, the application unblocks the device.

If you are managing the application using the command line, you can use the commands for managing blocked
devices to view a list of devices that are blocked as a result of the application running on the device and manually
unblock these devices before the blocking time expires. Kaspersky Security Center does not provide tools for
monitoring and managing blocked devices, except for the Network attack detected and Encryption detected
events.

To view the list of blocked devices, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-blocked-hosts


As a result of the command execution, the application outputs the list of blocked devices to the console.

To unblock devices, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --allow-hosts < address >


  where < address > is one or more IP addresses of the devices or subnets (IPv4/IPv6, including addresses in
  short form). You can specify multiple IP addresses of devices or subnets by separating them with a space.


As a result of the command execution, the application unblocks the specified devices.

  Examples:
  IPv4 addresses:
   dec - 192.168.0.1
   dec - 192.168.0.0/24
  IPv6 addresses:
   hex - FEDC:BA98:7654:3210:FEDC:BA98:7654:3210
   hex - FEDC:BA98:7654:3210:FEDC:BA98:7654:3210%1
   hex - 2001:db8::ae21:ad12
   hex - ::ffff:255.255.255.254
   hex - ::




                                                        343
Application Control
The Application Control component allows you to manage the launch of applications on protected devices.
Application Control lowers the risk of device infection by limiting users' access to applications. You can receive
information about applications installed on protected devices using the Inventory task.


  To use the component, a license that includes the corresponding function is required.


Application launching is regulated by Application Control rules.

The Application Control component can operate in one of two modes:

   Denylist. In this mode Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows all users to launch any applications that are not
   specified in the Application Control rules. By default, the Application Control component operates in this mode.

   Allowlist. In this mode Kaspersky Endpoint Security prevents all users from launching any applications that are
   not specified in the Application Control rules.

If the Application Control rules are created to the fullest extent possible, Kaspersky Endpoint Security prohibits
the launching of all new applications that are not verified by the administrator of the organization's local network,
but ensures the performance of the operating system and verified applications that users need to perform their
job duties.


  The Kaspersky Security Center administrator or a local user with the admin role assigned in the application
  can allow or deny process start under the root account using the Application Control.


Application Control is disabled by default. You can enable or disable Application Control, and also configure the
component's operation settings:

   Select the Application Control mode: allowlist or denylist.

   Create Application Control rules for each of the modes.

   Select the action that Kaspersky Endpoint Security performs upon detecting an attempt to run an application
   that matches the rules. Kaspersky Endpoint Security can apply rules and perform the actions specified in the
   rules, or test the rules and only inform about an attempt to run an application that matches the rules.

   Exporting and importing Application Control settings.


  Application Control does not control the launch of Snap, Flatpak, or AppImage applications.




                                                         344
The Application Control task does not control the launching of scripts from interpreters that are not supported by
Kaspersky Endpoint Security, or the launching of scripts that are not passed to the interpreter via the command
line. Kaspersky Endpoint Security supports the following interpreters: python, perl, bash, ssh.


  If the interpreter is allowed to launch by the Application Control rules, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not
  block the script launched from this interpreter. If the launch of at least one script specified in the interpreter
  command line is prohibited by the Application Control rules, Kaspersky Endpoint Security blocks all the scripts
  specified in the interpreter command line. Exclusion: cat script.py | python.




About Application Control rules
An Application Control rule is a set of settings that contain the conditions for triggering a rule and the actions of
the Application Control component when a rule is triggered (allow or block users from starting an application):

   The application belonging to the application category. An application category is a group of applications with
   common characteristics. For example, a category that includes executable files of installed applications, or a
   category of applications required for operation, which includes a standard set of applications used by the
   organization. Each category can only be used in one rule.


     Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not support use of the KL categories of Kaspersky Security Center.


   Allow selected users and/or user groups to run applications or prevent them from running applications. You can
   specify a user and/or user group that is allowed or not allowed to run applications of the specified category.

   Rule triggering condition. A condition is represented by the following correspondence: "condition type –
   condition criterion – condition value". Based on the rule triggering condition, Kaspersky Endpoint Security
   applies or does not apply the rule to the application. The rules use inclusive and exclusive conditions:

      Inclusive conditions. Kaspersky Endpoint Security applies the rule to the application if the application meets
      at least one inclusive condition.

      Exclusive conditions. Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not apply the rule to the application if the
      application meets at least one exclusive condition or does not meet any of the inclusive conditions.

   Rule triggering conditions are created using the following criteria:

      Name of the application's executable file.

      Name of the directory with the application's executable file.

      Hash of the application's executable file. Only SHA256 can be used.

   For each criterion used in the condition, a value must be specified.


     You can use masks to specify the names of files and directories.



     You can use the * character (any sequence of characters) or the ? character (any one character) as the file
     or directory name mask.

                                                         345
      You can put the * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) in a file or directory
      name that includes the / character. For example, /dir/*/file*/ or /dir/file*/.

      You can put a single ? character to represent any one character (including /) in the file or directory name.


    If the settings of the application being launched match the criteria specified in the inclusive condition, the rule
    is triggered. In this case, Kaspersky Endpoint Security performs the action specified in the rule. If application
    settings match the criteria specified in the exclusive condition, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not control
    the application launch.

Application control rules can have one of the following operation statuses:

    Enabled: the rule is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security applies this rule for the Application Control.

    Disabled: the rule is disabled and is not used for the Application Control.

    Test – Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows launching applications that meet the rule criteria, but logs
    information about launches of these applications in the report.

The priority of the rule operation status is higher than the priority of the action specified in the rule.




Configuring Application Control in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Application Control settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → Security Controls → Application Control).

Application Control component settings

              Setting                                                                   Description

  Application Control enabled /      This toggle switch enables or disables Application Control.
  disabled                           The toggle button is switched off by default.

  Action on starting applications    The action that Kaspersky Endpoint Security performs upon detecting an attempt to start an application that
  blocked by rules                   matches the configured rules:
                                         Test rules. If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security tests the rules and generates an event
                                         about an attempt to start an application that matches the rules.
                                         Apply rules (default value). If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security applies Application
                                         Control rules and performs the action specified in the rules.

  Application Control mode           Application Control task operation mode:
                                         Allowlist. If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security prevents all users from launching any
                                         applications except those specified in the Application Control rules.
                                         Denylist (default value). If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows all users to launch any
                                         applications except those specified in the Application Control rules.

  Application Control rules          Clicking the Configure rules link opens the Application Control rules window.

  Applying rules                     In the drop-down list, you can select how rules are added:
                                         Replace local rules with policy rules. When you select this item, the application applies only the rules
                                         specified in the policy.
                                         Add policy rules to local rules (default value). When you select this item, the application applies the rules
                                         specified in the policy together with the local rules configured on the protected device.




                                                                       346
Application Control rules window
The Application Control rules table has the tabs with the rules for each operation mode: Denylist (active) and
Allowlist. Both tabs of the Application Control rules table are empty by default.

Application Control rules settings

    Setting                                                                              Description

   Category       The name of the application category that is used by the rule.

   Status         Operation status of the Application Control rule:
                      Enabled – the rule is enabled, Application Control applies this rule during operation.
                      Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when the Application Control is running.
                      Test – Application Control allows launching applications that meet the rule criteria, but logs information about launches of these
                      applications in the report.


You can add, edit and remove Application Control rules.


   Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

   This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



   The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.




Application Control rule window
In this window, you can configure the settings for the Application Control rule.

Configuring an Application Control rule

        Setting                                                                               Description

   Rule description        Description of the Application Control rule.

   Status                  You can select the operation status of the Application Control rule:
                               Enabled – the rule is enabled, Application Control applies this rule during operation.
                               Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when the Application Control is running.
                               Test – Application Control allows launching applications that meet the rule criteria, but logs information about launches
                               of these applications in the report.

   Category                The Choose category link opens the Application categories window.

   Users and their         The table contains a list of users or user groups to which the Application Control rule applies, and the types of access
   rights                  assigned to them, and consists of the following columns:
                               User or group name – names of users or names of user groups to which the Application Control rule applies.
                               Access – access type (allow or block launching applications). This toggle button switches access type: Allow launching
                               the applications or Block launching the applications.

                           You can add, edit, and delete users or user groups.

                             Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                             This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




                                                                                  347
Application categories window
In this window, you can add a new category or configure the category settings for an Application Control rule.


   Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not support use of the KL categories of Kaspersky Security Center.


Application Control categories

      Setting                                                                        Description

   Category             Search bar for added application categories.
   name

   Add                  Clicking the button starts the category creation wizard. Follow the instructions of the Wizard.
                        For details about creating a category, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help.

   Edit                 Clicking this button opens the category properties window, where you can change the category settings. The Golden Image
                        (local) category cannot be edited.

   Remove               Clicking the button deletes the selected category. The Golden Image (local) category cannot be deleted.




Select user or group window
In this window, you can specify a local or domain user or user group for which you want to configure a rule.

Configuring an Application Control rule

          Setting                                                                     Description

   Manual                 If this option is selected, in the field below enter the name of the local or domain user or the name of a user group, to which the
                          Application Control rule will apply.

   List of users          If this option is selected, in the search field you can enter search criteria for the name of the user or name of the user group, to
   and groups             which the Application Control rule will apply, or you can select the name of the user group in the list below.




Configuring Application Control in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Application Control settings in the policy properties (Security
Controls→ Application Control).

Application Control component settings

              Setting                                                                      Description

   Enable Application                The check box enables the Application Control component.
   Control
                                     This check box is cleared by default.

   Action on application             The action that Kaspersky Endpoint Security performs upon detecting an attempt to start an application that
   startup attempt                   matches the configured rules:
                                          Apply rules (default value). If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security applies Application Control
                                          rules and performs the action specified in the rules.
                                          Test rules. If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security tests the rules and generates an event about
                                          an attempt to start an application that matches the rules.




                                                                             348
             Setting                                                                      Description

   Application Control mode          Application Control task operation mode:
                                         Allowlist. If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security prevents all users from launching any
                                         applications except those specified in the Application Control rules.
                                         Denylist (default value). If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows all users to launch any
                                         applications except those specified in the Application Control rules.

   Application Control rules         This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Application Control rules
                                     window.

   Applying rules                    In the drop-down list, you can select how rules are added:
                                         Replace local rules with policy rules. When you select this item, the application applies only the rules specified
                                         in the policy.
                                         Add policy rules to local rules (default value). When you select this item, the application applies the rules
                                         specified in the policy together with the local rules configured on the protected device.




Application Control rules window
The Application Control rules table contains the rules used by the Application Control component. The
Application Control rules table is empty by default.

Application Control rules settings

      Setting                                                                       Description

   Category            The name of the application category that is used by the rule.
   name

   Status              Operation status of the Application Control rule:
                           Enabled – the rule is enabled, Application Control applies this rule during operation.
                           Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when the Application Control is running.
                           Test – Application Control allows launching applications that meet the rule criteria, but logs information about launches of
                           these applications in the report.
                       You can change the rule status in the Add new rule window.


You can add, modify, or delete Application Control rules.



Adding rule window
In this window, you can configure the settings for the Application Control rule.

Adding the Application Control rule

        Setting                                                                       Description

   Description             Description of the Application Control rule.

   Rule status             In the drop-down list, you can select the status of the Application Control rule:
                               Enabled – the rule is enabled, Application Control applies this rule during operation.
                               Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when the Application Control is running.
                               Test – Application Control allows launching applications that meet the rule criteria, but logs information about launches
                               of these applications in the report.

   Category                The group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Application categories window.

   Users and their         The table contains a list of users or user groups to which the Application Control rule applies, and the types of access
   rights                  assigned to them, and consists of the following columns:
                               User or group name – names of users or names of user groups to which the Application Control rule applies.
                               Access – the type of access: Allow launching the applications or Block launching the applications.
                           You can add, edit, or delete users or user groups.




                                                                            349
Application categories window
In this window, you can add a new category or configure the category settings for an Application Control rule.


   Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not support use of the KL categories of Kaspersky Security Center.


Application Control categories

      Setting                                                                    Description

   Category           List of the added Application Control categories.
   name

   Add                Clicking the button starts the category creation wizard. Follow the instructions of the Wizard.
                      For details about creating a category, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help.

   Edit               Clicking this button opens the category properties window, where you can change the category settings. The Golden Image
                      (local) category cannot be edited.




User or group window
In this window, you can specify a local or domain user or user group for which you want to configure a rule.

Adding the Application Control rule

          Setting                                              Description

   Type                    The User or Group to which the Application Control rule applies.

   User or group name      Name of the user or user group to which the Application Control rule applies.

   Access                  Access type: Allow launching the applications or Block launching the applications.




Configuring Application Control in the command line
In the command line, you can manage Application Control by using the Application Control predefined task
(Application_Control).

By default, the Application Control task does not run. You can start and stop the task manually.

You can configure Application Control on a device by editing the settings of the Application Control predefined
task.


   If you change the list of allowed applications or prohibit the launch of all applications or applications affecting
   Kaspersky Endpoint Security's operation, then when modifying the task settings using the configuration file or
   using the command line option, run the kesl-control --set-settings command with the --accept
   option.




                                                                          350
You can also configure Application Control using Application Control commands:

    Create and edit lists of categories.

    View the list of categories created in the application.

    Configure the list of application control rules.



Application Control task settings
The table describes all available values and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Application Control task.

Application Control task settings

              Setting                                 Description                                                       Values

   AppControlMode                   Application Control task operation mode.             AllowList – Kaspersky Endpoint Security prevents users
                                                                                         from launching any applications that are not specified in the
                                                                                         Application Control rules.
                                                                                         DenyList (default value) – Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                                                                                         allows users to launch any applications that are not specified in
                                                                                         the Application Control rules.

   AppControlRulesAction            The action that Kaspersky Endpoint Security          ApplyRules (default value) – Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                                    performs upon detecting an attempt to start          applies Application Control rules and performs the action
                                    an application that matches the configured           specified in the rules.
                                    rules.
                                                                                         TestRules – Kaspersky Endpoint Security tests the rules and
                                                                                         generates an event about the detection of an application that
                                                                                         satisfies the rule.

   The [Categories.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   Name                             Name of the application category to which the
                                    rule applies.

   UseIncludes                      Usage of inclusive conditions to trigger the rule.   Yes – apply the rule to the application if the application meets
                                                                                         at least one inclusive condition.
                                                                                         No (default value) – do not apply the rule to the application,
                                                                                         even if the application meets the inclusive conditions.

   IncludeFileNames.item_#          Name of the executable file that triggers the        You can use masks to specify the file name.
                                    rule.
                                                                                           You can use the * character (any sequence of characters) or the
                                                                                           ? character (any one character) as the file or directory name
                                                                                           mask.

                                                                                           You can put the * character to represent any set of characters
                                                                                           (including an empty set) in a file or directory name that includes
                                                                                           the / character. For example, /dir/*/file*/ or /dir/file*/ .

                                                                                           You can put a single ? character to represent any one character
                                                                                           (including / ) in the file or directory name.




   IncludeFolders.item_#            Name of the directory with the application's         You can use masks to specify the directory name.
                                    executable file that triggers the rule.
                                                                                           You can use the * character (any sequence of characters) or the
                                                                                           ? character (any one character) as the file or directory name
                                                                                           mask.

                                                                                           You can put the * character to represent any set of characters
                                                                                           (including an empty set) in a file or directory name that includes
                                                                                           the / character. For example, /dir/*/file*/ or /dir/file*/ .

                                                                                           You can put a single ? character to represent any one character
                                                                                           (including / ) in the file or directory name.




                                                                         351
           Setting                                  Description                                                     Values

IncludeHashes.item_#              SHA256 hash of the executable file that           Only SHA256 can be used.
                                  triggers the rule.

UseExcludes                       Usage of excluding conditions to trigger the      Yes – do not apply the rule to the application if the application
                                  rule.                                             meets at least one exclusive condition or does not meet any of
                                                                                    the inclusive conditions.
                                                                                    No (default value) – apply the rule to the application, even if
                                                                                    the application meets at least one exclusive condition.

ExcludeFileNames.item_#           Name of the executable file that triggers the     You can use masks to specify the file name.
                                  rule.
                                                                                       You can use the * character (any sequence of characters) or the
                                                                                       ? character (any one character) as the file or directory name
                                                                                       mask.

                                                                                       You can put the * character to represent any set of characters
                                                                                       (including an empty set) in a file or directory name that includes
                                                                                       the / character. For example, /dir/*/file*/ or /dir/file*/ .

                                                                                       You can put a single ? character to represent any one character
                                                                                       (including / ) in the file or directory name.




ExcludeFolders.item_#             Name of the directory with the application's      You can use masks to specify the directory name.
                                  executable file that triggers the rule.
                                                                                       You can use the * character (any sequence of characters) or the
                                                                                       ? character (any one character) as the file or directory name
                                                                                       mask.

                                                                                       You can put the * character to represent any set of characters
                                                                                       (including an empty set) in a file or directory name that includes
                                                                                       the / character. For example, /dir/*/file*/ or /dir/file*/ .

                                                                                       You can put a single ? character to represent any one character
                                                                                       (including / ) in the file or directory name.




ExcludeHashes.item_#              SHA256 hash of the executable file that           Only SHA256 can be used.
                                  triggers the rule.

The [AllowListRules.item_#] section contains a list of Application Control rules for the AllowList operation mode.
Each [AllowListRules.item_#] section contains the following settings:

Description                       Description of the Application Control rule.

AppControlRuleStatus              Operation status of the Application Control       On (default value): the rule is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint
                                  rule:                                             Security applies this rule for the Application Control.
                                                                                     Off : the rule is not used for the Application Control.
                                                                                    Test – Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows applications
                                                                                    covered by the rule to be launched, but logs information about
                                                                                    the launch of these applications in the report.

Category                          Name of the application category for which the
                                  rule applies.
                                  You can specify the "Golden Image" category.

The [AllowListRules.item_#.ACL.item_#] section contains a list of users who are allowed or denied to run applications.

Access                            Access type assigned to a user or user group.      Allow (default value) — Allow running applications.
                                                                                     Block – Deny running applications.

Principal                         User or user group to which the Application        \Everyone (default value): the rule applies to all users.
                                  Control rule applies.
                                                                                     < user name > : name of the user to whom the rule applies.
                                                                                    @< group name > : name of the group of users to whom the
                                                                                    rule applies.

The [DenyListRules.item_#] section contains a list of Application Control rules for the DenyList operation mode.
Each [DenyListRules.item_#] section contains the following settings:

Description                       Description of the Application Control rule.




                                                                        352
               Setting                                 Description                                                  Values

    AppControlRuleStatus             Operation status of the Application Control       On (default value): the rule is enabled, Kaspersky Endpoint
                                     rule:                                             Security applies this rule for the Application Control.
                                                                                       Off : the rule is not used for the Application Control.
                                                                                       Test – Kaspersky Endpoint Security allows applications
                                                                                       covered by the rule to be launched, but logs information about
                                                                                       the launch of these applications in the report.

    Category                         Name of the created application category to
                                     which the rule applies.
                                     You can specify the "Golden Image" list of
                                     applications as a category.

    The [DenyListRules.item_#.ACL.item_#] section contains a list of users who are allowed or denied to run applications.

    Access                           Access type assigned to a user or user group.     Allow – allow applications to start.
                                                                                       Block (default value) – do not allow applications to start.

    Principal                        User or user group to which the Application       \Everyone (default value): the rule applies to all users.
                                     Control rule applies.
                                                                                       < user name > : name of the user to whom the rule applies.
                                                                                       @< group name > : name of the group of users to whom the
                                                                                       rule applies.




Creating and editing a list of categories
You can create a new category in two ways:

     using the "kesl --set-settings" command and the Application Control task settings configuration file
     (Application_Control);

     using the "kesl --set-categories" command and the category settings configuration file.

To create application categories, run the following command:

    kesl-control --set-categories --file < path to configuration file >


where:

--file < path to configuration file > – path to the configuration file with the category settings.

The file with category settings must have the following structure:

[
     {
        "Exclude" : [ "(FilePath like < full path to the executable file >)", "(FileHash ==
      < executable file hash >)" ],
        "GUID" : "< unique category ID >",
        "Include" : [ "(FilePath like < full path to executable file >)", "(FileHash ==
      < executable file hash >)" ],
        "Name" : "< name of category 1 >"
     },
     {
        "Exclude" : [ "(FilePath like < full path to the executable file >)", "(FileHash ==
      < executable file hash >)" ],
        "GUID" : "< unique category ID >",
        "Include" : [ "(FilePath like < full path to executable file >)", "(FileHash ==
      < executable file hash >)" ],

                                                                         353
         "Name" : "< name of category 2 >"
     }
]

To specify the file name in the Exclude and Include fields, you can use masks.


    You can use the * character (any sequence of characters) or the ? character (any one character) as the file or
    directory name mask.

    You can put the * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) in a file or directory
    name that includes the / character. For example, /dir/*/file*/ or /dir/file*/.

    You can put a single ? character to represent any one character (including /) in the file or directory name.



    The Name setting is required. If you do not specify the name of the category, it will not be created or will be
    deleted. The GUID setting is also required. If you do not specify it, an error message is displayed and the
    category is not created. The GUID setting must be specified without hyphens.


To edit the list of created application categories, run the following command:

    kesl-control --set-categories [--names < name of category 1 > < name of category 2 > ...
    < name of category N >] --file < path to configuration file >


    where:


     < name of category 1 > < name of category 2 > ... < name of category N > are names of categories
     for which you want to change information. If you want to change information about several categories, specify
     the names of the categories, separated by a space. If you do not specify a category name, existing categories
     are deleted and new categories are created from the specified file.

     --file < path to configuration file > – path to the configuration file with the category settings.



Viewing the list of categories
On the command line, you can view the list of created application categories using the Application Control
command, kesl-control --get-categories.

The list of created categories contains the following categories:

     Categories created in Kaspersky Security Center.

     Categories added in the Application Control task settings using the command line.

     The "GoldenImage" category created using the Inventory task (in Kaspersky Security Center or using the
     command line).

To view the list of all created application categories, run the following command:

    kesl-control --get-categories [--file <path to configuration file>] [--json]


                                                          354
  where:


   --file <path to configuration file> – full path to the JSON configuration file to which the settings
   will be output.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is omitted, the settings are
   output in the INI format.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security displays the following information about the each application category:

   Unique identifier (GUID) of the category

   Category name

   list of inclusive conditions to trigger the rule

   list of exclusive conditions to trigger the rule

To view the list of separate application categories, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-categories [--names <name of category 1> <name of category 2> ...
  <name of category N>] [--file <path to configuration file>] [--json]


  where:


   <name of category 1> <name of category 2> ... <name of category N> – names of the
   categories whose information you want to view. If you want to view information about several categories,
   specify the names of the categories, separated by a space.

    --file <path to configuration file> – full path to the JSON configuration file to which the category
   list will be exported.

   --json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is omitted, the settings are
   output in the INI format.


  If in the Application Control task settings, in the [Categories.item_#] section for inclusive or exclusive
  conditions for triggering a rule, you specify symbolic links to an application file or directory with executable
  files, then when viewing the list of categories for these conditions, the source path to which the symbolic link
  points is displayed.




Configuring the Application Control rule list
To view the list of Application Control rules, run the following command:

  kesl-control --get-settings 21 [--file <path to configuration file>] [--json]




                                                        355
  where:


   --file <path to configuration file> – full path to the configuration file to which the settings will be
   exported.

   --json: output data in JSON format.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security displays the following information about Application Control rules:

   Application Control task operation mode;

   the action that Application Control takes upon detecting an attempt to launch an application that matches the
   configured rule

   description of the Application Control rule (if any)

   operation status of the Application Control rule

   name of the application category the rule applies to

   access type assigned to a user or user group

   user or user group to which the Application Control rule applies

To edit the list of application categories and Application Control rules, run the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 21 [--file <path to configuration file>] [--json]


  where:


   --file <path to configuration file> – full path to the configuration file from which the settings will be
   imported.

   --json – import data from a JSON file.

To delete the list of application categories and Application Control rules, run the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 21 --set-to-default




                                                          356
Inventory
The Inventory task provides information about all applications executable files stored on the client devices.
Obtaining information about the applications installed on the devices can be useful, for example, for creating
Application Control rules.


   To use the task, a license that includes the corresponding function is required.


You can configure the following inventory settings:

    Select the types of objects that the application will detect on the device during inventory (files, scripts).

    Enables or disables adding applications detected on the device by the Inventory task to the "Golden Image"
    category.

    Configure inventory scopes (paths to directories in which to search for executable application files).

    Configure exclusions from the inventory.




Configuring Inventory in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can perform an inventory of the applications for the protected device using the Inventory
task.

You can create and run Inventory user tasks. You can configure inventory settings by editing the settings of these
tasks.


   The Kaspersky Security Center database can store information about up to 150,000 processed files. When
   this number of records is reached, new files will not be processed. To resume the Inventory task, delete the
   files registered in the Kaspersky Security Center database as a result of previous inventories, from the device
   where Kaspersky Endpoint Security is installed.


Inventory task settings

          Setting                                                                   Description

   Add files to the       The check box enables or disables adding applications detected on the device by the Inventory task to the Golden Image
   Golden Image           category. If the check box is selected, you can use the "Golden Image" category in the Application Control rules.
   category               This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan all executables   This check box enables or disables of executable file scans.
                          The check box is selected by default.

   Scan binaries          The check box enables or disables scans of binary files (files with the extensions .elf, .java and .pyc).
                          The check box is selected by default.

   Scan scripts           This check box enables or disables script scans.
                          The check box is selected by default.




                                                                       357
          Setting                                                                            Description

  Inventory scopes         The table contains the inventory scopes scanned by the application. The application will scan files and directories
                           located in the paths specified in the table. By default, the table contains one inventory scope – /usr/bin.
                           You can add, configure, delete, move up, or move down inventory scan scopes in the table.

                             Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                             Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If you
                             want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory, you
                             must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                             This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                             Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                             Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If you
                             want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory, you
                             must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                             This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                             Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

                             This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



                             Clicking the scan scope name opens the <Scan scope name> window. In this window, you can modify the settings of the selected
                             scan scope.



                             Clicking the Add button opens the <New scan scope> window. In this window, you can define a new scan scope.




Add scan scope window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scope for the Inventory task.

Inventory scope settings

            Setting                                                                           Description

  Scope name                  Field for entering the inventory scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan settings section.
                              The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope              This check box enables or disables the scan of this scope when the task is performed.
                              If this check box is selected, the application processes this inventory scope while running the task.
                              If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this inventory scope while running the task. You can later
                              include this scope in task settings by selecting the check box.
                              The check box is selected by default.




                                                                             358
            Setting                                                                      Description

  File system, access         Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to include in the inventory scan scope. You can use masks
  protocol, and path          to specify the path.

                                You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                              The field must not be blank. The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file
                              system.

  Masks                       This list contains name masks of the objects that the application scans while running the task.
                              By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                              You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusion scopes section
In the Exclusion scopes section for the Inventory task, you can configure the scopes to be excluded from scans.



Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                     Description

  Exclusion scope name     Exclusion scope name.

  Path                     Path to the directory excluded from scan.

  Status                   The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




                                                                         359
Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure scan exclusion scope for the Inventory task.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name     Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                           The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope           This check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope when the task is executed.
                           If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope during task execution.
                           If this check box is cleared, the application includes this scope during task execution. You can later exclude this scope
                           from scanning by selecting the check box.
                           The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access      Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to exclude from the inventory. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path       specify the path.

                             You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                             You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                             in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                             You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                             character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                             The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                             You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                           The field must not be blank.

  Masks                    The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan.
                           You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Configuring Inventory in the Administration Console
In the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console, you can perform an inventory of the applications for the
protected device using the Inventory task.

You can create and run Inventory user tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the settings of the
tasks.


  The Kaspersky Security Center database can store information about up to 150,000 processed files. When
  this number of records is reached, new files will not be processed. To resume the Inventory task, delete the
  files registered in the Kaspersky Security Center database as a result of previous inventories, from the device
  where Kaspersky Endpoint Security is installed.




                                                                      360
Inventory task settings

            Setting                                                                        Description

   Add files to the Golden         The check box enables or disables adding applications detected on the device by the Inventory task to the Golden
   Image category                  Image category. If the check box is selected, you can use the "Golden Image" category in the Application Control rules.
                                   This check box is cleared by default.

   Scan all executables            This check box enables or disables of executable file scans.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Scan binaries                   The check box enables or disables scans of binary files (files with the extensions .elf, .java and .pyc).
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Scan scripts                    This check box enables or disables script scans.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Inventory scopes                The group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Scan scopes window.


In the Exclusion scopes section for the Inventory task, you can also configure scopes to be excluded from scans.



Scan scopes window
The table contains the scan scopes. The application will scan files and directories located in the paths specified in
the table. By default, the table contains one scan scope – /usr/bin.

Scan scope settings for the Inventory task
     Setting                                   Description

   Scope name         Scan scope name.

   Path               Path to the directory that the application scans.

   Status             The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan scope for the Inventory task.

Inventory scope settings

            Setting                                                                        Description

   Scan scope name                 Field for entering the scan scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                                   The entry field must not be blank.

   Use this scope                  This check box enables or disables the scan of this scope when the task is performed.
                                   If this check box is selected, the application processes this scan scope while running the task.
                                   If this check box is cleared, the application does not process this scan scope while running the task. You can later
                                   include this scope in task settings by selecting the check box.
                                   The check box is selected by default.




                                                                             361
             Setting                                                                         Description

   File system, access            Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to include in the scan scope. You can use masks to
   protocol, and path             specify the path.

                                    You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                    You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                    in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                    You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                    character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                    The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                    You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                  The field must not be blank.

   Masks                          This list contains name masks of the objects that the application scans while running the task.
                                  By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                  You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions section
Settings of scan exclusions

      Group of                                                                        Description
      settings

   Exclusion           This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this window,
   scopes              you can define the list of scopes to be excluded from monitoring.




Exclusion scopes window
This table contains scan exclusion scopes. The application does not scan files and directories located at the paths
specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                        Description

   Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

   Path                       Path to the directory excluded from scan.

   Status                     The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

   This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



   The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



   Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


                                                                             362
<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure scan exclusion scope for the Inventory task.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                  Description

  Exclusion scope name     Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                           The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope           This check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope when the task is executed.
                           If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope during task execution.
                           If this check box is cleared, the application includes this scope during task execution. You can later exclude this scope
                           from scanning by selecting the check box.
                           The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access      Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to exclude from the inventory. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path       specify the path. The field must not be blank.

                             You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                             You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                             in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                             You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                             character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                             The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                             You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.




  Masks                    The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from scan.
                           You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Configuring Inventory on the command line
You can use the command line to inventory applications on the protected device as follows:

    With the help of the Inventory_Scan predefined task. You can manually start or stop this task, and configure the
    task run schedule. You can configure scan settings by editing the settings of this task.

    With the help of user inventory tasks (InventoryScan-type tasks). You can manually start, stop, pause, or
    resume user tasks and configure the task schedule.

You can view the list of applications detected on the device as a result of the Inventory task by using Application
Control management commands.




Inventory task settings
The table describes all available values and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Inventory task.


                                                                      363
Inventory task settings

          Setting                                       Description                                                        Values

   ScanScripts              Enables script scanning.                                             Yes (default value) — Scan scripts.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan scripts.

   ScanBinaries             Enables binary files scanning (elf, java, and pyc).                  Yes (default value) — Scan binaries.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan binaries.

   ScanAllExecutable        Enables the scanning of files with an executable bit.                Yes (default value) — Scan files with an executable bit.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan files with an executable bit.

   CreateGoldenImage        Adds applications detected on the device by the Inventory task        Yes – add detected applications to the "Golden
                            to the Golden Image category. If CreateGoldenImage=Yes ,             Image" application category.
                            then you can use the "Golden Image" application category in
                                                                                                 No (default value) – do not add detected applications
                            the Application Control rules.
                                                                                                 to the "Golden Image" application category.

   The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   AreaDesc                 Description of the inventory scope. The maximum length               Default value: All objects .
                            of the string specified using this setting is 4096 characters.

   UseScanArea              Enables scans of the specified inventory scope. To run the task,     Yes (default value) — Scan the specified inventory
                            enable scans of at least one inventory scope.                        scope.
                                                                                                 No — Do not scan the specified inventory scope.

   AreaMask.item_#          Inventory scan scope limitation. In the inventory scan scope,        The default value is * (scan all objects).
                            the application scans only the files that are specified using the
                            masks in the shell format.
                            If this setting is not specified, the application scans all the
                            objects in the inventory scope. You can specify several values
                            for this setting.

   Path                     Path to the directory with objects to be scanned.                    < path to local directory > — Scan objects in
                                                                                                 the specified directory.
                                                                                                 Default value: /usr/bin

   The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   AreaDesc                 Description of the inventory exclusion scope.                        The default value is not defined.

   UseScanArea              Excludes the specified scope from the inventory.                     Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope.
                                                                                                 No — Do not exclude the specified scope.

   AreaMask.item_#          Limiting the inventory exclusion scope using shell masks.            Default value: * (exclude all objects)
                            If this setting is not specified, the application excludes all the
                            objects in the inventory scope. You can specify several values
                            for this setting.

   Path                     Path to the directory with objects to be excluded.                   < path to local directory > — Exclude objects in
                                                                                                 the specified directory from scan. You can use masks
                                                                                                 to specify the path.

                                                                                                   You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file
                                                                                                   or directory name mask.

                                                                                                   You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                                   set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
                                                                                                   the / character in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                                   example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                                   You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                                   represent any set of characters (including an empty set
                                                                                                   and the / character) in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                                   example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                                   The ** mask can be used only once in a directory
                                                                                                   name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect
                                                                                                   mask.

                                                                                                   You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                                   character in the file or directory name.




                                                                          364
Viewing a list of detected applications
To view the list of applications detected on the device, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --get-app-list [--json]


  where --json means output data in JSON format.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security displays the following information about the detected applications:

   Date and time of inventory. Date and time when the Inventory task was performed

   Number of applications. The number of applications detected on the device

   The list of applications containing the following information:

      Path. Path to the application.

      Hash. Application hash sum.

      Type. Application type. For example, Script, Executable.

      Categories. Categories that the application belongs to (if they were previously created). You can view the
      list of created application categories using the command kesl-control --get-categories.


     When you add a new category, its information is not automatically updated in the application list. To update
     the application list, you need to restart the Inventory task.




                                                        365
Device Control
The Device Control component allows you to manage user access to the devices that are installed on or
connected to the client device (for example, hard drives, cameras, or Wi-Fi modules). Access management lets you
protect the client device from infection when external devices are connected, and prevent data loss or leaks.

The Device Control component is enabled automatically with the default settings when Kaspersky Endpoint
Security starts.

Device Control manages user access on the following levels:

   Device type as classified by Device Control, such as printers, removable drives, or CD/DVD drives. One of the
   following access modes can be applied to each device type:

       Allow, to allow access to devices of this type.

       Block, to block access to devices of this type.

       Depends on bus: allow or block access to devices depending on the access mode set for the bus through
       which the device is connected.

       By rule: allow or block access to devices depending on the access rules. A device access rule is a set of
       options that determine which users can access devices that are installed on the client device or connected
       to it, and at what time.
       When a forbidden device is connected, the application denies access to the device to the users specified in
       the rule and displays a notification. During attempts to read and write on this device, the application silently
       blocks the users specified in the rule from reading/writing.
       If you try to perform an operation with a device whose access mode is set to By rule, but no rule active at
       the time of access is found, the operation will be blocked.

   Connection bus. Connection bus is an interface that devices use to connect to the client device, such as USB
   or FireWire. One of the following access modes can be applied to connection buses:

       Allow: grant access to devices connected through this connection bus.

       Block: deny access to devices connected using this connection bus.

   For example, access may be denied to all devices connected via USB.

By default, the Depends on connection bus access mode is selected for all device types. The Allow access mode is
selected for connection buses. Device Control grants users full access to all devices accordingly.

Device Control does not block system drives. If the application cannot automatically detect the system drive, the
Device Control component terminates with an error.

Blocking devices by device type or connection bus via the system device driver is not supported on the following
Linux kernels: 3.10, 5.14, 5.15, 5.17, 6.1, 6.8. On these kernels and in the By rule access mode, only the opening of files
and reading of directories (that is, getting the names of files and directories) are blocked. On systems that do not
support fanotify, blocking the reading of directories is also not supported.

When Device Control is enabled for the first time, it generates a DeviceAllowed event for all detected devices with
a known device or bus type. No repeat events are generated upon subsequent component runs unless there were
changes in the control settings for these devices.

                                                           366
When Device Control is disabled, the application unblocks access to blocked devices.

You can enable, disable, and configure Device Control:

    Select the application's operation mode when there is an attempt to access a device to which access is
    prohibited by Device Control settings: block or only notify about the attempt to access the device.

    Select a device access mode depending on the type.

    Select an access mode for the bus through which the devices are connecting.

    Remove individual devices from the scope of Device Control by adding them to the list of trusted devices.
    Trusted devices are devices to which users have full access. You can add devices to a list of trusted devices by
    identifier or identifier mask. For example, you can limit access to specific USB devices or only to USB drives;
    access to other USB devices is denied.
    If you are managing the application via the command line, you can view the IDs of connected devices by running
    kesl-control --get-device-list on the client device.
    If you are managing the application via Kaspersky Security Center, information about devices installed on, or
    connected to, the client devices can be sent to the Administration Server. The information sharing is enabled
    by default.


       Information about devices is transferred if the client device is under the control of an active policy and
       synchronized with Network Agent (performed with the frequency specified in the Network Agent policy
       properties, by default – every 15 minutes).


    Define an access schedule for devices: only hard drives, removable drives, floppy disks, and CD/DVD drives.


       In general application settings, if blocking access to files during scans is disabled, you cannot use a device
       access schedule to block access to devices.


    You can define access rules for devices depending on their type. Allow or block access for specified users at a
    specified time.


  Device Control ignores mount point exclusions. Access to a device mounted at an excluded point can be
  limited with Device Control settings.




Configuring Device Control in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Device Control settings in the policy properties (Application settings →
Security Controls→ Device Control)

Device Control settings

                Setting                                                            Description

  Device Control enabled /        This toggle button enables or disables Device Control.
  disabled                        The check toggle button is switched on by default.

  Configure trusted devices       Clicking this link opens the Trusted devices window. In this window, you can add devices to the list of trusted
                                  devices.



                                                                 367
                Setting                                                                    Description

  Device Control operating mode            Response to attempts to access a device that is restricted according to Device Control rules:
                                               Inform. If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security tests the selected access mode and
                                               generates an event about detection of an attempt to access a device.
                                               Block (default value). When this option is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security applies the access
                                               mode defined for the device or bus.

  Configure access settings for            Clicking this link opens the Device types window. In this window, you can configure access to devices by
  device types                             type.

  Configure access settings for            Clicking this link opens the Connection buses window. In this window, you can configure access settings for
  connection buses                         connection buses.




Trusted devices window
The table contains a list of trusted devices. The table is empty by default.

Trusted device settings

     Setting                                     Description

  Device ID         Trusted device ID.

  Device name       Trusted device name.

  Device type       Trusted device type (for example, Hard drive or Smart card reader).

  Host name         Name of the client device the trusted device is connected to.

  Comment           Comment related to a trusted device.


You can add a device to the list of trusted devices by the device ID or by selecting the required device in the list of
devices detected on the user device.

You can edit and delete trusted devices in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.


You can also import the list of devices from a file by clicking Import and export the list of added devices to a file in
JSON format by clicking Export. When importing, you will be prompted to replace the list of trusted devices or add
the devices to the existing list.



Trusted device (Device ID) window
In this window, you can add a device to the list of trusted devices by its identifier.




                                                                         368
Adding device by ID

    Setting                                                                         Description

   Device ID      Entry field for a device ID or device ID mask. You can manually specify the device ID or copy the ID of the required device from the
                  Devices detected on hosts list.
                  To specify an identifier, you can use the following wildcards: * (any sequence of characters) or ? (any single character). For example,
                  you can specify the USBSTOR* mask to allow access to all USB drives.

   Comment        Entry field for a comment (optional). This field is available after you enter the device ID, and click the Next button.




Trusted device window (List of detected devices)
In this window you can add a device to the list of trusted devices by selecting it in the list of existing managed
devices.

Information about existing devices is available only if an active policy exists and synchronization with the Network
Agent has been completed (the synchronization interval is specified in the Network Agent policy properties; the
default setting is 15 minutes). If you create a new policy and there are no other active ones, the list will be empty.

Adding device from list

       Setting                                                                Description

   Device type            In this drop-down list, you can select type of devices to be displayed in the Devices detected on hosts table.

   Device ID mask         Entry field for a device ID mask.

   Comment                Entry field for a comment (optional). This field is available after you select the devices, and click the Next button.


Clicking the Filter button opens the window, where you can set up the filtering of displayed information about
devices.



Device types window
In this window, you can configure access rules for various types of devices.

Access rules for device types

               Setting                                                                        Description

   Settings for access to data           The table contains the following columns:
   storage devices
                                             Type represents device types (for example, Hard drives, Printers).
                                             Access mode represents the access mode for this type of device. You can select one of the following
                                             access modes:

                                                  Allow, to allow access to devices of this type.
                                                  Block, to block access to devices of this type.
                                                  Depends on bus (default value), to allow or block access to devices depending on the access mode for a
                                                  bus used for connecting a device.
                                                  By rule – allow or block access to devices, depending on the access rule and schedule. You can configure
                                                  the access rule and its schedule by clicking the required device type.




                                                                              369
               Setting                                                                              Description

  Settings for access to other            The table contains the following columns:
  devices                                      Type – type of device (for example, Input devices, Sound adapters).
                                               Access mode represents the access mode for this type of device. You can select one of the following
                                               access modes:

                                                    Allow, to allow access to devices of this type.
                                                    Block, to block access to devices of this type. The Block access mode cannot be selected for network
                                                    adapters.
                                                    Depends on bus (default value), to allow or block access to devices depending on the access mode for a
                                                    bus used for connecting a device.




Device access settings window
In this window, you can configure the access mode and access rules for the selected type of device.

Device access settings

     Setting                                                                                 Description

  Device             Access mode for devices of the selected type:
  access mode              Allow: allow access to devices of the selected type.
                           Block: prohibit access to devices of the selected type.
                           Depends on bus (default value), to allow or block access to devices depending on the access rule for a bus used for
                           connecting a device.
                           By rule – allow or block access to devices, depending on the access rule and schedule.

  Device             The table contains a list of access rules and consists of the following columns:
  access rules             Access schedule – names of existing access schedules.
                           Users and/or user groups – names of users or names of user groups, to which the access rule will apply.
                           Access – access mode for the schedule:

                                Allow (provides access to devices of the selected type).
                                Block (prohibits access to devices of the selected type).

                           Status – status of the access rule:

                                Enabled – the rule is enabled; Application Control applies this rule when it runs.
                                Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when Application Control is running.

                     By default, the table contains the Default schedule access schedule, which provides all users with full access to devices (the
                     \Everyone option is selected in the list of users and groups) at any time, if access by the connection bus is allowed for this type
                     of device.
                     You can add, edit, and delete access rules.

                         Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                         This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




Device access rules window
In this window, you can configure the device access rule.

Device access rule

               Setting                                                                              Description

  Device access rule settings             Access mode for devices of the selected type:
                                               Allow (default value) – provide access to the devices of the selected type.
                                               Block: prohibit access to devices of the selected type.

                                                                                    370
               Setting                                                                            Description

  Users and/or user groups            Name of the user or user group to which the rule applies.
                                      The default value is \Everyone (all users).
                                      You can add, edit, and delete users or user groups.

                                        Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                        This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




  Status                              Access rule status:
                                           Enabled – the rule is enabled; Application Control applies this rule when it runs.
                                           Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when Application Control is running.

  Schedule for access to              Schedule for the specified users' access to devices. The default value is Default schedule. You can set a
  devices                             different schedule.




Select user or group window
In this window, you can specify a local or domain user or user group for which you want to configure an access rule.

Configuring an access rule

     Setting                                                                            Description

  Manual            If you select this option, in the field below, you need to enter the name of a local or domain user (without specifying the full name
                    with the domain, if the system allows entering user names in this format, or in the < domain name >\< user name > or < user
                    name >@< domain name >) format, or the name of a group of users (the group name must start with @) to which the device access
                    rule must apply.

  List of           If this option is selected, in the search field you can enter search criteria for the name of the user or name of the user group, to
  users and         which the device access control rule will apply, or you can select the name of the user group in the list below.
  groups




Schedules window
In this window, you can specify the schedule for the selected device access rule.

You can add, edit, and delete access schedule.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


You cannot delete the Default schedule.




                                                                               371
Scheduling window
In this window, you can configure the device access schedule. You can configure schedules only for hard drives,
removable drives, floppy disks, and CD/DVD drives.


  In the General settings → Application settings section, if the Block access to files during scans check box
  is cleared, then it is not possible to block access to devices using an access schedule.


Schedule for access to devices

     Setting                                                                          Description

  Name               Entry field for the access schedule name. The schedule name must be unique.

  Time intervals     The table where you can select time intervals for the schedule (days and hours).
                     Intervals highlighted in green are included to the schedule.
                     To exclude an interval from the schedule, click the corresponding cells. Intervals excluded from the schedule are highlighted in gray.
                     By default, all intervals (24/7) are included to the schedule.




Connection buses window
In this window, you can configure access mode for connection buses.

Access mode for connection buses

       Setting                                           Description

  Connection bus          Connection bus used by devices to connect to the client device:
                              FireWire
                              USB

  Access mode             This toggle switch sets the access mode for devices that use this bus:
                              Allow (default): provide access to devices connected through this bus.
                              Block: deny access to devices connected using this connection bus.




Configuring Device Control in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Device Control settings in the policy properties (Security
Controls→ Device Control).

Device Control settings

           Setting                                                                         Description

  Enable Device Control           This check box enables or disables Device Control.
                                  The check box is selected by default.

  Trusted devices                 This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Trusted devices window. In this
                                  window, you can add a device to the list of trusted devices.




                                                                            372
            Setting                                                                       Description

  Device Control                  Response to attempts to access a device that is restricted according to Device Control rules:
  operating mode                      Inform. If you select this option, Kaspersky Endpoint Security tests the selected access mode and generates an
                                      event about detection of an attempt to access a device.
                                      Block (default value). When this option is selected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security applies the access mode defined
                                      for the device or bus.

  Device Control                  This group of settings contains buttons that open windows where you can configure access mode for devices by type
  settings                        and connection buses.




Trusted devices window
The table contains a list of trusted devices. The table is empty by default.

Trusted device settings

     Setting                                       Description

  Device ID           ID of a trusted device.

  Device name         Name of a trusted device.

  Device type         Trusted device type (for example, Hard drive or Smart card reader).

  Host name           Name of the client device the trusted device is connected to.

  Comment             Comment related to a trusted device.


You can add a device to the list of trusted devices by ID or by mask or by selecting the required device in the list of
devices detected on the user device.

You can edit and delete trusted devices in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.


You can also import the list of devices from a file by clicking Advanced -> Import and export the list of added
devices to a file by clicking Advanced -> Export selected or Advanced -> Export all. When importing, you will be
prompted to replace the list of trusted devices or add the devices to the existing list.



Trusted device window
In this window, you can add a device to the list of trusted devices by its identifier.

Adding device by ID

     Setting                                                                        Description

  Device ID           The field for entering the identifier or the identifier mask of the device that you want to add to the list of trusted devices.
                      To specify an identifier, you can use the following wildcards: * (any sequence of characters) or ? (any single character). For example,
                      you can specify the USBSTOR* mask to allow access to all USB drives.

  Find on             Clicking the button displays the devices found on the connected client devices using the specified ID or mask. The button is
  hosts               available if the Device ID field is not empty.



                                                                            373
     Setting                                                                       Description

  Devices            The table contains the following columns:
  found                  Device type – type of device found (for example, Hard drive or Smart card reader).
                         Device ID – ID of the device found.
                         Device name – name of the device found.
                         Host name — name of the client device that the found device is connected to.

  Comment            The field for entering a comment for the device that you want to add to the list of trusted devices (optional).




Device window on client devices
In this window you can add a device to the list of trusted devices by selecting it in the list of existing managed
devices.

Information about existing devices is available only if an active policy has been created and synchronization with
the Network Agent has been performed (the synchronization interval is specified in the Network Agent policy, 15
minutes by default).

When you create a new inactive policy, the list will be empty.

Adding a device from the list of devices detected on managed client devices

        Setting                                                                       Description

  Host name                Field for entering the name or the name mask for the managed device for which you want to find connected devices. The
                           default mask is * – all managed devices.

  Device type              In this drop-down list, you can select the type of connected device to search for (for example, Hard drives or Smart card
                           readers). The All devices option is selected by default.

  Device ID                Field for entering the identifier or identifier mask for the device you want to find. The default mask is * – all devices.

  Find on hosts            When you click this button, the application searches for devices with the specified parameters. The search results are
                           displayed in the table below.

  List of detected         The table contains the following columns:
  devices                       Host name — name of the client device that the found device is connected to.
                                Device type – type of device found (for example, Hard drive or Smart card reader).
                                Device name – name of the device found.
                                Device ID – ID of the device found.




Device type window
In this window, you can configure access mode for various types of devices.

Access mode for device types

      Setting                                                                     Description

  Device type        Device type (for example, Hard drives, Printers).

  Access mode        Device access mode. Right-clicking with the mouse opens a context menu where you can select one of the following items:
                          Allow: allow access to devices of the selected type.
                          Block: prohibit access to devices of the selected type.
                          Depends on bus (default value): allow or block access to the devices depending on the access mode for a connection bus.
                          By rule – allow or block access to devices, depending on the access rule and schedule.


You can configure access rules and schedules in the Configure device access rule window, which opens when you
double-click the device type.




                                                                           374
Configure device access rule window
In this window, you can configure access rules and schedules for the selected device type.

This window is opened by double-clicking the device type in the Device type window.

Device access rules and schedules

     Setting                                                                         Description

  Users and/or      The list contains users and groups for which you can configure access schedule.
  user groups       By default, the table contains the \Everyone item (all users).
                    You can add, edit, or delete users or user groups.

  Device            This table contains access schedules for users and user groups. It consists of the following columns:
  access rules          Access schedule – names of existing access schedules. The check box next to the schedule indicates whether this schedule
                        is used by the component.
                        Access – access type for the schedule: Allow (grant access to devices of the selected type) or Block (deny access to
                        devices of the selected type).
                    You can configure schedules only for hard drives, removable drives, floppy disks, and CD/DVD drives. By default, the table contains
                    the Default access schedule, which provides all users with full access to devices (the \Everyone item is selected in the Users
                    and/or user groups list) at any time if access via the connection bus is allowed for this type of device.
                    You can add, edit, or delete access schedules for selected users. The Default schedule cannot be modified or removed.




User or group window
In this window, you can specify a user or group of users to which the device access rule applies.

Configure device access rule

     Setting                                                                         Description

  Type             The User or Group to which the Application Control rule applies.

  User or          Name of a local or domain user (without specifying the full name with the domain, if the system allows entering user names in this
  group name       format, or in the < domain name >\< user name > or < user name >@< domain name >) format, or the name of a group of users to
                   which the rule applies.




Access schedule window
In this window, you can configure the device access schedule.

Schedule for access to devices

     Setting                                                                         Description

  Name              Entry field for the access schedule name.

  Time intervals    The table where you can select time intervals for the schedule (days and hours).
                    Intervals highlighted in green are included to the schedule.
                    To exclude an interval from the schedule, click the corresponding cells. Intervals excluded from the schedule are highlighted in gray.
                    By default, all intervals (24/7) are included to the schedule.




                                                                           375
Connection buses window
In this window, you can configure access mode for connection buses.

Access mode for connection buses

       Setting                                                                 Description

  Connection           Connection bus used by devices to connect to the client device:
  bus                      FireWire
                           USB

  Access mode          Connection bus access mode. Right-clicking with the mouse opens a context menu where you can select one of the following
                       items:
                           Allow (default): provide access to devices connected through this bus.
                           Block: deny access to devices connected using this connection bus.




Configuring Device Control on the command line
You can manage Device Control in the command line with the help of the Device Control predefined task
(Device_Control).

The Device Control task is not running by default. You can start and stop the task manually.

You can configure Device Control by editing the settings of the Device Control predefined task.

You can also view the list of connected devices using Device Control commands.




Device Control task settings
The table describes all available values and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the Device
Control task.

Device Control task settings

                               Setting                                        Description                                Values

   OperationMode                                                        Response to attempts        Block (default value) – the application applies
                                                                        to access a device that     the access mode defined for the device or bus.
                                                                        is restricted according
                                                                                                    Notify – the application tests the selected
                                                                        to Device Control
                                                                                                    access mode and generates an event about the
                                                                        rules.
                                                                                                    detection of an attempt to access a device.

  The [DeviceClass] section contains access modes for devices depending on their type.

   HardDrive                                                            Access mode for the         Allow — Users are allowed access to hard drives.
                                                                        hard drives connected
                                                                                                    DependsOnBus (default): access to the hard
                                                                        to a client device.
                                                                                                    drive depends on the access mode defined for
                                                                                                    the bus through which it is connected.
                                                                                                    Block — Access to all hard drives (except system
                                                                                                    hard drives, which are never blocked by the
                                                                                                    Device Control) is blocked for users.
                                                                                                    ByRule — Access to the hard drives depends on
                                                                                                    the access rules.



                                                                       376
                     Setting          Description                               Values

RemovableDrive                  Access mode for the        Allow — Access to the removable drives is
                                removable drives           allowed for users.
                                connected to a client
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to the
                                device.
                                                           removable drive depends on the access mode
                                                           defined for the bus through which it is connected.
                                                           Block — Access to the removable drives is
                                                           blocked for users.
                                                           ByRule — Access to the removable drives
                                                           depends on the access rules.

FloppyDrive                     Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to floppy
                                floppy disks connected     disks.
                                to a client device.
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to the floppy
                                The application does       disk depends on the access mode defined for the
                                not block floppy disks     bus through which it is connected.
                                connected to the
                                                           Block — Access to floppy disks is blocked for
                                client device using the
                                                           users.
                                ISA bus.
                                                           ByRule — Access to floppy disks depends on the
                                                           access rules.

OpticalDrive                    Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to CD/DVD
                                CD/DVD drives              drives.
                                connected to a client
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to the CD/DVD
                                device.
                                                           drive depends on the access mode defined for
                                                           the bus through which it is connected.
                                                           Block — Access to CD/DVD drives is blocked for
                                                           users.
                                                           ByRule — Access to CD/DVD drives depends on
                                                           the access rules.

SerialPortDevice                Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to devices
                                devices connected to       connected through a serial port.
                                a client device via a
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to a device
                                serial port.
                                                           connected through a serial port depends on bus
                                The application does       access mode.
                                not block the devices
                                                           Block — Access to devices connected through a
                                connected to a client
                                                           serial port is blocked for users.
                                device via a serial port
                                using the ISA bus.

ParallelPortDevice              Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to devices
                                devices connected to       connected through a parallel port.
                                a client device via a
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to a device
                                parallel port.
                                                           connected through a parallel port depends on bus
                                                           access mode.
                                                           Block — Access to devices connected through a
                                                           parallel port is blocked for users.

Printer                         Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to printers.
                                printers connected to
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to a printer
                                a client device.
                                                           depends on the access mode defined for the bus
                                                           through which it is connected.
                                                           Block — Access to printers is blocked for users.

Modem                           Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to modems.
                                modems connected to
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to a modem
                                a client device.
                                                           depends on the access mode defined for the bus
                                                           through which it is connected.
                                                           Block — Access to modems is blocked for users.

TapeDrive                       Access mode for the        Allow — Users are allowed access to tape
                                tape devices               devices.
                                connected to a client
                                                           DependsOnBus (default): access to a tape device
                                device.
                                                           depends on the access mode defined for the bus
                                                           through which it is connected
                                                           Block — Access to tape devices is blocked for
                                                           users.



                               377
                  Setting         Description                               Values

MultifuncDevice              Access mode for the       Allow — Users are allowed access to
                             multifunctional devices   multifunctional devices.
                             connected to a client
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to a
                             device.
                                                       multifunctional device depends on the access
                                                       mode defined for the bus through which it is
                                                       connected.
                                                       Block — Access to multifunctional devices is
                                                       blocked for users.

SmartCardReader              Access mode for the       Allow — Access to smart card readers is allowed
                             smart card readers        for users.
                             connected to a client
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to a smart card
                             device.
                                                       reader depends on the access mode defined for
                                                       the bus through which it is connected.
                                                       Block — Access to smart card readers is blocked
                                                       for users.

WiFiAdapter                  Access mode for the       Allow — Users are allowed access to Wi-Fi
                             Wi-Fi adapters            adapters.
                             connected to a client
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to a Wi-Fi
                             device.
                                                       adapter depends on connection bus access
                                                       mode.
                                                       Block — Access to the Wi-Fi adapters is blocked
                                                       for users.

NetworkAdapter               Access mode for the       Allow — Users are allowed access to external
                             external network          network adapters.
                             adapters connected to
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to an external
                             a client device.
                                                       network adapter depends on the access mode
                                                       defined for the bus through which it is connected.



                                                          Device Control does not allow denying
                                                          access to external network adapters to
                                                          avoid disconnecting the client device from
                                                          the network.



PortableDevice               Access mode for the       Allow — Users are allowed access to portable
                             portable devices          devices.
                             connected to a client
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to a portable
                             device.
                                                       device depends on the access mode defined for
                                                       the bus through which it is connected.
                                                       Block — Access to portable devices is blocked
                                                       for users.

BluetoothDevice              Access mode for the       Allow — Users are allowed access to Bluetooth
                             Bluetooth devices         devices.
                             connected to a client
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to a Bluetooth
                             device.
                                                       device depends on the access mode defined for
                                                       the bus through which it is connected.
                                                       Block — Access to Bluetooth devices is blocked
                                                       for users.

ImagingDevice                Access mode for the       Allow —Access to all imaging devices is allowed
                             imaging devices           for users.
                             connected to a client
                                                       DependsOnBus (default): access to an imaging
                             device.
                                                       device depends on the access mode defined for
                                                       the bus through which it is connected.
                                                       Block —Access to all imaging devices is blocked
                                                       for users.




                            378
                             Setting                                        Description                                      Values

SoundAdapter                                                          Access mode for the       Allow —Access to all sound adapters is allowed
                                                                      sound adapters            for users.
                                                                      connected to a client
                                                                                                DependsOnBus (default): access to a sound
                                                                      device.
                                                                                                adapter depends on the access mode defined for
                                                                                                the bus through which it is connected.
                                                                                                Block —Access to all sound adapters is blocked
                                                                                                for users.

InputDevice                                                           Access mode for the       Allow — Users are allowed access to input
                                                                      input devices             devices.
                                                                      (keyboards, mouse,
                                                                                                DependsOnBus (default): access to an input
                                                                      touchpad, and others)
                                                                                                device depends on the access mode defined for
                                                                      connected to a client
                                                                                                the bus through which it is connected.
                                                                      device.
                                                                                                Block — Access to input devices is blocked for
                                                                                                users.

The [DeviceBus] section contains access modes for connection buses.

USB                                                                   Access mode for           Allow (default value) — Users are allowed access
                                                                      devices connected to      to USB-devices.
                                                                      the client device via
                                                                                                Block — Access to USB-devices is blocked for
                                                                      USB.
                                                                                                users.

FireWire                                                              Access mode for           Allow (default value) — Users are allowed access
                                                                      devices connected to      to devices connected via the FireWire interface.
                                                                      the client device via
                                                                                                Block — Access to devices connected via the
                                                                      FireWire.
                                                                                                FireWire interface is blocked for users.

The [TrustedDevices.item_ #] section contains trusted devices.

DeviceId                                                              Specifies ID or ID mask   You can use the masks * (any sequence of
                                                                      of a trusted device.      characters) or ? (any single character) to indicate
                                                                                                the device ID.

                                                                                                    Examples:
                                                                                                    To deny access to all USB devices except the specified
                                                                                                    one, specify the following settings:

                                                                                                    In the [DeviceBus] section, specify USB=Block

                                                                                                    In the [TrustedDevices.item_#] section, specify
                                                                                                     DeviceId=<device ID>

                                                                                                    To deny access to all USB devices, but allow access to all
                                                                                                    USB drives, specify the following settings:

                                                                                                    In the [DeviceBus] section, specify USB=Block

                                                                                                    In the [TrustedDevices.item_#] section, specify
                                                                                                     DeviceId=USBSTOR*




Comment                                                               Comment to the            —
                                                                      specified trusted
                                                                      device.

The [Schedules.item_#] section contains the device access schedule. You can configure a schedule only for hard drives, removable drives, floppy
disks, and CD/DVD drives.

ScheduleName                                                          Specifies a schedule      The default value: Default .
                                                                      name.
                                                                                                The Default schedule provides users full access
                                                                      The schedule name         to devices at any time if the connection bus is
                                                                      must be unique.           allowed to access the corresponding device type.
                                                                                                You cannot delete the Default schedule.




                                                                    379
                              Setting                                         Description                                       Values

DaysHours                                                               Specifies time intervals   All (default value) — The schedule is valid 24/7
                                                                        for a schedule.            (no time limitation).
                                                                                                    < week_day > — Days of the week. You can use
                                                                                                   either the full week day names or abbreviations
                                                                                                   (for example, for Monday, you can specify Mo , or
                                                                                                    Mon , or Monday ). For week days, you can specify
                                                                                                   intervals or specific days. The week starts from
                                                                                                   Sunday.
                                                                                                   < hour > — Hours [0:24]. For hours, you can
                                                                                                   specify only intervals.

                                                                                                       Examples:
                                                                                                       Schedule_1 is valid from Sunday till Saturday from 0 a.m. to
                                                                                                       11 a.m., from 12 p.m. to 3 p.m., and from 4 p.m. to 12 a.m.:
                                                                                                        [Schedules.item_0001]
                                                                                                        ScheduleName=schedule_1
                                                                                                        DaysHours=Su-Sa:0..11,12..15,16..24
                                                                                                       Schedule_2 is valid for the following intervals: on
                                                                                                       Thursdays from 12 p.m. to 2 p.m. and on Fridays from 2 a.m.
                                                                                                       to 3 p.m. and from 4 p.m. to 12 a.m.:
                                                                                                        [Schedules.item_0002]
                                                                                                        ScheduleName=schedule_2
                                                                                                        DaysHours=Th:12..14;Fr:2..15,16..24
                                                                                                       Schedule_3 is valid 24 hours 7 days a week:
                                                                                                        [Schedules.item_0003]
                                                                                                        ScheduleName=schedule_3
                                                                                                        DaysHours=All




The [HardDrivePrincipals.item_#] section contains hard drive access rules.
For hard drives, at least one schedule must always be enabled. You can assign several access rules to a hard drive. Also, multiple schedules can be
specified for a user or group of users. If an access rule conflict occurs for a user or group, the minimum access rights are granted.

Principal                                                               Specifies a user or        \Everyone (default value) — The access rule
                                                                        group of users for         applies to all users.
                                                                        whom the access rule
                                                                                                   < user name > — Name of a local or domain user
                                                                        is applied.
                                                                                                   to which the access rule applies (without
                                                                                                   specifying the full name with the domain, if the
                                                                                                   system allows entering user names in this format,
                                                                                                   or in the < domain name >\< user name > or
                                                                                                   < user name >@< domain name > format).
                                                                                                   @< group name > — Name of the (local or
                                                                                                   domain) group of users to which the access rule
                                                                                                   applies.

[HardDrivePrincipals.item_#.AccessRules.item_#]                         Access rule settings.      —

UseRule                                                                 Specifies whether the       Yes (default value) — The access rule is enabled.
                                                                        rule is enabled or
                                                                                                    No — The access rule is disabled.
                                                                        disabled.

ScheduleName                                                            Schedule specified in      The default value: Default .
                                                                        the
                                                                        [Schedules.item_#]
                                                                        section.

Access                                                                  Specifies access type.     Allow (default value) — Access to hard drives is
                                                                                                   allowed.
                                                                                                    Block — Access to hard drives is blocked.

The [RemovableDrivePrincipals.item_#] section contains the access rules for removable drives.
For removable drives, at least one schedule must always be enabled. You can assign several access rules to a removable drive. Also, multiple
schedules can be specified for a user or group of users. If an access rule conflict occurs for a user or group, the minimum access rights are
granted.




                                                                       380
                              Setting                                          Description                                Values

Principal                                                                Specifies a user or        \Everyone (default value) — The access rule
                                                                         group of users for         applies to all users.
                                                                         whom the access rule
                                                                                                    < user name > — Name of a local or domain user
                                                                         is applied.
                                                                                                    to which the access rule applies (without
                                                                                                    specifying the full name with the domain, if the
                                                                                                    system allows entering user names in this format,
                                                                                                    or in the < domain name >\< user name > or
                                                                                                    < user name >@< domain name > format).
                                                                                                    @< group name > — Name of the (local or
                                                                                                    domain) group of users to which the access rule
                                                                                                    applies.

[RemovableDrivePrincipals.item_#.AccessRules.item_#]                     Access rule settings.      —

UseRule                                                                  Specifies whether the      Yes (default value) — The access rule is enabled.
                                                                         rule is enabled or
                                                                                                    No — The access rule is disabled.
                                                                         disabled.

ScheduleName                                                             Schedule specified in      The default value: Default .
                                                                         the
                                                                         [Schedules.item_#]
                                                                         section.

Access                                                                   Specifies access type.     Allow (default value) — Access to removable
                                                                                                    drives is allowed.
                                                                                                    Block — Access to removable drives is blocked.

The [FloppyDrivePrincipals.item_#] section contains access rules for floppy drives.
For floppy drives, at least one schedule must always be enabled. You can assign several access rules to a floppy drive. Also, multiple schedules can
be specified for a user or group of users. If an access rule conflict occurs for a user or group, the minimum access rights are granted.

Principal                                                                Specifies a user or        \Everyone (default value) — The access rule
                                                                         group of users for         applies to all users.
                                                                         whom the access rule
                                                                                                    < user name > — Name of a local or domain user
                                                                         is applied.
                                                                                                    to which the access rule applies (without
                                                                                                    specifying the full name with the domain, if the
                                                                                                    system allows entering user names in this format,
                                                                                                    or in the < domain name >\< user name > or
                                                                                                    < user name >@< domain name > format).
                                                                                                    @< group name > — Name of the (local or
                                                                                                    domain) group of users to which the access rule
                                                                                                    applies.

[FloppyDrivePrincipals.item_#.AccessRules.item_#]                        Access rule settings.      —

UseRule                                                                  Specifies whether the      Yes (default value) — The access rule is enabled.
                                                                         rule is enabled or
                                                                                                    No — The access rule is disabled.
                                                                         disabled.

ScheduleName                                                             Schedule specified in      The default value: Default .
                                                                         the
                                                                         [Schedules.item_#]
                                                                         section.

Access                                                                   Specifies access type.      Allow (default value) — Access to floppy drives
                                                                                                    is allowed.
                                                                                                    Block — Access to floppy drives is blocked.

The [OpticalDrivePrincipals.item_#] section contains the access rules for CD/DVD drives.
For CD/DVD drives, at least one schedule must always be enabled. You can assign several access rules to a CD/DVD drive. Also, multiple schedules
can be specified for a user or group of users. If an access rule conflict occurs for a user or group, the minimum access rights are granted.




                                                                       381
                         Setting                              Description                              Values

  Principal                                              Specifies a user or      \Everyone (default value) — The access rule
                                                         group of users for       applies to all users.
                                                         whom the access rule
                                                                                  < user name > — Name of a local or domain user
                                                         is applied.
                                                                                  to which the access rule applies (without
                                                                                  specifying the full name with the domain, if the
                                                                                  system allows entering user names in this format,
                                                                                  or in the < domain name >\< user name > or
                                                                                  < user name >@< domain name > format).
                                                                                  @< group name > — Name of the (local or
                                                                                  domain) group of users to which the access rule
                                                                                  applies.

  [OpticalDrivePrincipals.item_#.AccessRules.item_#]     Access rule settings.    —

  UseRule                                                Specifies whether the    Yes (default value) — The access rule is enabled.
                                                         rule is enabled or
                                                                                  No — The access rule is disabled.
                                                         disabled.

  ScheduleName                                           Schedule specified in    The default value: Default .
                                                         the
                                                         [Schedules.item_#]
                                                         section.

  Access                                                 Specifies access type.   Allow (default value) — Access to CD/DVD
                                                                                  drives is allowed.
                                                                                  Block — Access to CD/DVD drives is blocked.




Viewing the list of connected devices on the command line

  Only users with the admin and audit roles can view the list of connected devices.


To view the list of connected devices, execute the following command:

  kesl-control [-D] --get-device-list


Kaspersky Endpoint Security displays the following information about connected devices:

   Device type. Type of the connected device. For example, OpticalDrive or HardDrive.

   Identifier. ID of the connected device.

   Name. Name of the connected device.

   Path. Path to the device in the sysfs virtual operating system.

   System drive. The setting indicates whether the connected device is a system drive (Yes or No).

   Bus. Connection bus. Possible values: UnknownBus, USB, FireWire.

   Driver. Name of the driver read by the sysfs virtual operating system.




                                                        382
Web Control
Web Control controls user access to web resources. This allows you to reduce traffic consumption and reduce
inappropriate use of working time. When a user attempts to open a website whose access is restricted by Web
Control, Kaspersky Endpoint Security blocks access or displays a warning message telling the user that the
website is undesirable.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security monitors only HTTP and HTTPS traffic.

Web Control allows you to configure access to websites in the following ways:

   By content category. Website content is categorized based on Kaspersky Security Network, heuristic analysis,
   and a database of known websites (included in the application databases). You can restrict user access to, for
   example, the "Social networks" content category or other categories .

   By data type category. You can restrict user access to data on the website, and hide graphics, for example. The
   application determines the data type by the file format, not the extension.


      The application does not scan files inside archives. For example, if image files are archived, the application
      detects the data type as Archives rather than Image files.


   By web address. You can specify a web address or a web address mask.

You can use several methods to regulate access to websites at the same time. For example, you can restrict
access to the "Office Application Files" data type only for the "Webmail" website category.

By default, the default rule selected for all web resources is Allow. In accordance with this rule, Web Control allows
users to gain access to web resources if no other web resource access rules are defined.

You can change the default rule for Web Control, which governs how the application regulates access to web
resources that are not covered by other rules, and set the default rule to Block. In accordance with this rule, Web
Control prevents users from gaining access to web resources if no other web resource access rules are defined.




About web resource access rules
A web resource access rule is a set of filters and an action that the application performs when users visit web
resources described in the rule at a time specified in the rule schedule. Filters let you specify web resources to
which access is monitored by the Web Control component.

The following filters are available:

   Filter by content category. Web Control can categorize web resources based on content . You can control
   user access to web resources that have content defined by these categories. When users visit web resources
   that belong to a selected content category, the application performs the action specified in the rule.

   Filter by data type category. Web Control can categorize web resources based on data type. You can control
   user access to data located on web resources related to certain types of data. When users visit web resources
   that relate to a selected data type category, the application performs the action specified in the rule.



                                                         383
   Filter by web resource address. You can control user access to all addresses of a web resource or to individual
   addresses of a web resource and/or to groups of addresses of a web resource.
   If you define both a filter by content category and/or data type category and a filter by web resource address,
   and the specified addresses of web resources and/or groups of web resource addresses belong to the
   selected content categories or data type categories, then the application does not control access to all of the
   web resources of the selected content categories and/or data type categories, but rather only controls access
   to the specified addresses of the web resources and/or groups of addresses of web resources.

   Filter by name of users and user groups. You can define users and/or user groups whose access to web
   resources is controlled according to the rule. For example, you can restrict browser access to the Internet for all
   users of an organization except the IT department.

   Rule schedule. You can set a rule schedule. The rule schedule determines the time when the application
   controls access to the web resources specified in the rule. For example, you can restrict internet access
   through the browser access to working hours only.

For each rule, you can specify the action that Web Control performs when a user visits a web resource that
matches the rule settings:

   Allow. Web Control allows the user to access the web resource.

   Block. Web Control blocks the user's access to the web resource and displays a message that access is
   blocked. By clicking links in the blocking message, the user can send a complaint message to the corporate LAN
   administrator about the mistaken blocking and gain access to the requested web resource.

   Inform. Web Control displays a warning that the web resource is undesirable. By clicking links in the warning
   message, the user can send a complaint message to the corporate LAN administrator about a mistaken
   warning. In this case, the user's access to the web resource is not blocked.

Each rule has a priority. The higher the rule is on the list, the higher its priority. If a website is added to multiple rules,
Web Control controls access to websites in accordance with the highest-priority rule. For example, the application
may identify the corporate portal as a social network. To restrict access to social networks while allowing access
to the corporate web portal, create two rules: a blocking rule for the "Social networks" category and an allowing
rule for the corporate web portal. The corporate web portal access rule must have a higher priority than the social
network access rule.


  If no blocking rules are created, HTTPS traffic is not decrypted.




Configuring Web Control in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Web Control settings in the policy properties (Application settings →
Security Controls → Web Control).




                                                            384
Web Control component settings

         Setting                                                                              Description

  Web Control is            This toggle switch enables or disables Web Control.
  enabled / disabled        The toggle button is switched off by default.

  List of rules             The table contains a list of web resource access rules. Web Control applies rules in the order in which they are listed in the
                            table.
                            The table contains the following columns:
                                Rule name. Web resource access rule name.
                                Status. Status of the web resource access rule:

                                     Enabled – the rule is enabled, Web Control applies this rule during operation.
                                     Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when Web Control is running.

                                You can enable or disable the toggle switch in the table, or select or clear the Use this rule check box in the Web
                                Control rule window.
                                Action. The action to be taken by the application when it detects an attempt to access web resources that match
                                the rule.
                            You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.

                              Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                              This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                              Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                              This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                              Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                              This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


                            You can also import the list of rules from a file by clicking Import and export the list of added rules to a file by clicking
                            Export. When importing, you will be prompted to replace the list of rules or add the rules to the existing list.

  Default rule              You can select the default rule that governs how the application regulates access to web resources that are not covered
                            by other rules:
                                Allow everything not specified in the list of rules (default) to allow access to web resources.
                                Block everything not specified in the list of rules to block access to web resources.

  Templates                 Warning. The input field contains the template for the message that appears when a rule is triggered that warns about an
                            attempt to access an undesirable web resource.
                            Block message. The input field contains the template for the message that appears when a rule is triggered that blocks
                            access to a web resource.
                            Message to administrator. The input field contains the template for a complaint to be sent to the administrator of the
                            corporate LAN when the user believes that a blocked web resource should not be blocked. After a user requests access,
                            Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends a Message to the administrator about denied access to a web page event to
                            Kaspersky Security Center. The event description contains the message to the administrator with the variables replaced
                            by their values. If no Kaspersky Security Center solution is deployed in your organization or there is no connection with the
                            Administration Server, the application will send a message to the administrator's specified email address.




Web Control rule window
In this window, you can configure the settings of the web resource access rule.

Adding a web resource access rule

      Setting                                                                             Description

  Rule name            Field for entering the name of the web resource access rule. The rule name must be unique.

  Status               You can select the status of the web resource access rule:
                           Enabled – the rule is enabled, Web Control applies this rule during operation.
                           Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when Web Control is running.



                                                                                385
       Setting                                                                      Description

  Action               You can select the action that Web Control will perform when it detects an attempt to access a web resource that matches
                       the rule:
                           Allow (default value) – allow access to the web resource.
                           Block – block access to the web resource and display a message that access is blocked.
                           Inform – display a warning that the web resource is undesirable. By clicking links in the warning message, the user can
                           access the requested web resource.

  Filter by            This check box enables or disables the content category filter. If the check box is selected, the Content categories link is
  content              available. Clicking this link opens a window in which you can select the relevant content categories.
  category             This check box is cleared by default.

  Filter by data       This check box enables or disables the content category filter. If the check box is selected, the Data type categories link is
  type category        available. Clicking this link opens a window in which you can select the relevant data type categories.
                       This check box is cleared by default.

  Addresses            You can select the way the web resource address filter is used:
                           Apply to all addresses (default). If this option is selected, the web resource address filter is not used; the Web Control rule
                           is applied to all web resource addresses.
                           Apply to the specified addresses and/or groups. When this option is selected, the table of web resource addresses
                           covered by the rule becomes available, as well as the Add address button, which you can click to open a window in which
                           you can add the required address of the web resource, and the Add group button, which opens the Address groups
                           window in which you can add groups of web resource addresses.

  Users                You can select the way the user filter is applied for users that are covered by web resource access rules:
                           Apply to all users (default value). If this option is selected, the user filter is not used; the Web Control rule is applied to all
                           users.
                           Apply to the specified users and/or groups. When this option is selected, the table of users and user groups covered by
                           the rule becomes available, as well as the Add button, which opens the Select user or group window, in which you can add
                           users and/or user groups.

  Rule schedule        Web Control rule schedule. By default, Always is specified as the schedule. Clicking the Always link opens the Schedules
                       window, in which you can configure a different schedule for the rule.




Address groups window
The table contains groups of addresses of web resources for which user access is controlled by the Web Control
component. The table is empty by default.

Configuring a web resource access rule

                 Setting                                                   Description

  Group name                               Name of the group of web resource addresses to which the rule applies.

  Number of addresses in the group         Number of addresses in the address group.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.

If you want to add a new group of addresses to the list of groups in this window, open the Group window by
clicking the Add button above the table.

If you want to add a group of addresses to the list of groups in the Web Control rule window, select the check box
next to a group name in the table and click the Add groups to rule button below the table.



Group window
In this window, you can add a group of web resource addresses.




                                                                           386
Configuring a web resource access rule

     Setting                                  Description

  Group name       Name of the new group of web resource address group.

  Addresses        Table of addresses included in the web resource address group.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

  This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Select user or group window
In this window, you can specify a local or domain user or user group for which you want to configure a web resource
access rule.

Configuring a web resource access rule

       Setting                                                                     Description

  Manual               If this option is selected, in the field below enter the name of the local or domain users or the name of a user group to which the
                       web resource access rule must apply.

  List of users        If this option is selected, in the search field you can enter search criteria for the name of the user or name of the user group to
  and groups           which the web resource access control rule must apply, or you can select the name of the user group in the list below.




Schedules window
In this window, you can specify the schedule for the selected device access rule.

You can add, edit, and delete access schedule.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


The Always default schedule cannot be deleted or edited.



Access schedule window
In this window, you can configure the web resource access schedule.


                                                                          387
Web resource access schedule

     Setting                                                                             Description

  Name             Entry field for the access schedule name. The schedule name must be unique.

  Time intervals   The table where you can select time intervals for the schedule (days and hours).
                   Intervals highlighted in green are included to the schedule.
                   To exclude an interval from the schedule, click the corresponding cells. Intervals excluded from the schedule are highlighted in gray.
                   By default, all intervals (24/7) are included to the schedule.




Configuring Web Control in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Web Control settings in the policy properties (Security
Controls→ Web Control).

Web Control component settings
      Setting                                                                                Description

  Enable Web        The check box enables the Web Control component.
  Control           This check box is cleared by default.

  Web Control       The table contains a list of web resource access rules. Web Control applies rules in the order in which they are listed in the table.
  settings          The table contains the following columns:
                         Status. Status of the web resource access rule:

                               Enabled – the rule is enabled, Web Control applies this rule during operation.
                               Disabled – the rule is disabled and is not used when Web Control is running.

                        You can select or clear the check box in the table, you can also select or clear the Use this rule check box in the Web
                        Control rule window.
                        Action. The action to be taken by the application when it detects an attempt to access web resources that match the rule.
                        Name. Web resource access rule name.
                    You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.

                       Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                       This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                       Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                       This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                       Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                       This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


                    You can also import a list of rules from a file by clicking Advanced → Import and export the list of added rules to a file by clicking
                    Additional → Export selected or Additional → Export all. When importing, you will be prompted to replace the list of rules or
                    add the rules to the existing list.

  Default rule      In the drop-down list, you can select the default rule that governs how the application regulates access to web resources that
                    are not covered by other rules:
                         Allow (default value) – allow access to the web resources.
                         Block – block access to the web resources.

  Message           This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Message templates window.
  templates




                                                                                388
Web Control rule window
In this window, you can configure the settings of the web resource access rule.

Add Web Control rule

     Setting                                                                     Description

  Rule name        Field for entering the name of the web resource access rule. The rule name must be unique.

  Use this rule    This check box enables or disables the use of this rule when the application is running.
                   If the check box is selected, the rule is enabled, and Web Control applies this rule at runtime.
                   If the check box is cleared, the rule is disabled and is not used when Web Control is running. You can enable the use of this Web
                   Control rule later by selecting the check box.
                   The check box is selected by default.

  Filter           In the drop-down list, you can select a content filter for the web resource:
  content
                       Do not filter (default value). If this item is selected, no web resource content filter is used.
                       By content category. When this item is selected, the Select button becomes available. Clicking this button opens the
                       Content category selection window.
                       By data type category. When this item is selected, the Select button becomes available. Clicking this button opens the
                       Data type category selection window.
                       By content category and data type category. When this item is selected, the Select buttons become available. Clicking
                       these buttons opens windows where you can select the necessary categories.

  Filter           In the drop-down list, you can select a filter for the address of a web resource:
  addresses
                       Any address (default value). If this item is selected, the web resource address filter is not used; the Web Control rule is
                       applied to all web resource addresses.
                       Specified addresses. When this item is selected, the Select addresses button becomes available. Clicking this button opens
                       the Select addresses window, where you can select the necessary web resource addresses.

  Apply to         In the drop-down list, you can select the users that the web resource access rule applies to:
  users                All users (default value). If this item is selected, the user filter is not used; the Web Control rule is applied to all users.
                       Selected users. When this item is selected, the Select users button becomes available. Clicking this button opens the
                       Select users window.

  Rule             In the drop-down list, you can configure the schedule for the web resource access rule:
  schedule             Always (default value). When this item is selected, the web resource access rule is applied without time limits, that is, at all
                       times.
                       <Schedule name>. When this item is selected, the Delete and Edit buttons become available, which you can click to delete or
                       configure the schedule.
                       Add new schedule. Selecting this item opens the Access schedule window where you can configure a new schedule for the
                       web resource access rule.

  Rule action      In the drop-down list, you can select the action that Web Control will perform when it detects an attempt to access a web
                   resource that matches the rule:
                       Allow (default value) – allow access to the web resource.
                       Block – block access to the web resource and display a message that access is blocked.
                       Inform – display a warning that the web resource is undesirable. By clicking links in the warning message, the user can access
                       the requested web resource.




Content category selection window
In this window, you can select the content categories for which you want to control access.

To do this, select check boxes next to categories.

All check boxes are cleared by default.


  Selecting check boxes for all nested content categories does not automatically select the check box for the
  parent content category.

                                                                         389
Data type category selection window
In this window, you can select the type categories for which you want to control access.

To do this, select check boxes next to categories.

All check boxes are cleared by default.



Select addresses window
In this window, you can specify the addresses of web resources for which you want to control user access. You can
specify multiple addresses; enter each address on a new line for convenience of copying them. You can use masks
to specify addresses.

If you want to specify a group of addresses, open the Select address groups window by clicking the Add address
group button.



Select address groups window
The table contains groups of addresses of web resources for which user access is controlled by the Web Control
component.

If you want to add a group of addresses to the list of groups in the Select addresses window, select the check box
next to a group name in the table and click the Add button below the table.

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


If you want to add a new group of addresses to the list of groups in this window, open the Add address group
window by clicking the Add button above the table.

The table is empty by default.



Add address group window
In this window, you can specify the groups of addresses of web resources for which you want to control user
access. You can specify multiple addresses in the address group; enter each address on a new line for convenience
of copying them. You can use masks to specify addresses.




                                                           390
Select users window
The table contains the names of users and user groups for which access to web resources is controlled according
to the rule.

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


If you want to add a new user and/or user group to the user list in this window, click the Add button located above
the table to open the User or group window.

The table is empty by default.



User or group window
In this window, you can specify a user or group of users to which the web resource access rule applies.

Configuring a web resource access rule

         Setting                                       Description

  Type                     The User or Group to which the Application Control rule applies.

  User or group name       Name of the user or user group to which the rule applies.




Access schedule window
In this window, you can configure the web resource access schedule.

Web resource access schedule

     Setting                                                                         Description

  Name              Entry field for the access schedule name.

  Time intervals    The table where you can select time intervals for the schedule (days and hours).
                    Intervals highlighted in green are included to the schedule.
                    To exclude an interval from the schedule, click the corresponding cells. Intervals excluded from the schedule are highlighted in gray.
                    By default, all intervals (24/7) are included to the schedule.




                                                                           391
Configuring Web Control message templates
Depending on the action specified in the properties of Web Control rules, when users attempt to access web
resources, the application displays one of the following types of messages (by replacing the HTTP server response
with an HTML page containing a message):

   Warning. This type of message warns the user that visiting the web resource is undesirable and/or violates the
   corporate security policy. The application displays a warning message if the Inform action is selected in the
   settings of the rule that matches this web resource.
   If the user believes the warning is a mistake, a link in the warning lets the user send an automatically-generated
   complaint message to the company's LAN administrator.

   Blocked web resource message The application displays a message that the web resource has been blocked if
   the Block action is selected in the settings of the rule that matches this web resource.
   If the user believes the web resource should not be blocked, a link in the blocked web resource message lets the
   user send an automatically-generated complaint to the company's LAN administrator.

Templates are provided for warning messages, blocked web resource messages, and complaint messages to the
company's LAN administrator. You can edit their content.

To change a message template in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Policies and policy profiles.
   The list of policies opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the devices to which the policy is applied. To do so, click the link in
    the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the administration group in the window that
    opens.
   The list displays the policies configured for the selected administration group.

 3. Click the name of the required policy in the list.
   The policy properties window opens.

 4. In the policy properties window, select Application settings → Security Controls → Web Control.

 5. In the Templates section, configure the Web Control message templates on the following tabs:

      Warning. The input field contains the template for the message that appears when a rule is triggered that
      warns about an attempt to access an undesirable web resource.

      Block message. The input field contains the template for the message that appears when a rule is triggered
      that blocks access to a web resource.

      Message to administrator. The input field contains the template for a complaint to be sent to the
      administrator of the corporate LAN when the user believes that a blocked web resource should not be
      blocked. After a user requests access, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends a Message to the administrator
      about denied access to a web page event to Kaspersky Security Center. The event description contains the
      message to the administrator with the variables replaced by their values. If no Kaspersky Security Center
      solution is deployed in your organization or there is no connection with the Administration Server, the
      application will send a message to the administrator's specified email address.


                                                         392
   On the Warning and Block message tabs, you can add variables and links to the messages for the user by using
   the Add variable and Add link buttons. If you do not specify a protocol when adding a link to a web address,
   https:// is automatically added to the web address.
   You can restore the text of the message template by clicking the Default button.

 6. Click OK.

 7. Click the Save button to save the changes made.

To change a message template in the Administration Console:

 1. In the Managed devices folder in the Administration Console tree, open the folder with the name of the
    administration group to which the required devices belong.

 2. In the workspace, select the Policies tab.

 3. In the list of policies, select the required policy and double-click it to open the Properties: <Policy name>
    window.
   You can also open the policy properties window by using the Properties item in the policy context menu or by
   clicking the Configure policy settings link located to the right of the list of policies in the section with the
   policy settings.

4. In the policy window, select Security Controls → Web Control.

 5. In the Message templates section, click the Configure button.

 6. This opens the Message templates window; in that window, configure the Web Control message templates on
    the following tabs:

      Warning. The input field contains the template for the message that appears when a rule is triggered that
      warns about an attempt to access an undesirable web resource.

      Block message. The input field contains the template for the message that appears when a rule is triggered
      that blocks access to a web resource.

      Complaint to administrator. The input field contains the template for a complaint to be sent to the
      administrator of the corporate LAN when the user believes that a blocked web resource should not be
      blocked. After a user requests access, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends a Message to the administrator
      about denied access to a web page event to Kaspersky Security Center. The event description contains the
      message to the administrator with the variables replaced by their values. You can view these events in the
      Kaspersky Security Center console using the User requests selection. If no Kaspersky Security Center
      solution is deployed in your organization or there is no connection with the Administration Server, the
      application will send a message to the administrator's specified email address.

   On the Warning and Block message tabs, you can add variables and links to the messages for the user by using
   the Variable and Insert link buttons. You can restore the text of the message template by clicking the Default
   button.

 7. Click OK.

 8. Click Apply.




                                                         393
Configuring Web Control on the command line
On the command line, you can manage Web Control using the Web Control predefined task (Web_Control).

The Web Control task is stopped by default. You can start and stop the task manually.

You can edit Web Control settings by changing the settings of the Web Control predefined task.

You can also view and edit Web Control settings using Web Control management commands.



Web Control task settings
The table below describes all available values and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Web Control task.

Web Control task settings

                       Setting                                      Description                                          Values

   WebControlDefaultAction                              The default rule, that is, the action   Allow (default value) – allow access to the web
                                                        that Web Control performs when          resources.
                                                        it detects an attempt to gain
                                                                                                Block – block access to the web resources.
                                                        access to web resources that are
                                                        not covered by other rules.

   ComplaintRecipient                                   The administrator's email address
                                                        to which messages about
                                                        mistaken blocking of web
                                                        resources are sent.

  The [Rules.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   Name                                                 Web resource access rule name.
                                                        The rule name must be unique.

   WebControlAction                                     The action of the rule that Web         Allow (default value) – allow access to the web
                                                        Control will perform when it            resource.
                                                        detects an attempt to access a
                                                                                                Block – block access to the web resource.
                                                        web resource that matches the
                                                        rule.                                   Notify – display a warning that the web resource is
                                                                                                undesirable. By clicking links in the warning message,
                                                                                                the user can access the requested web resource.

   Enabled                                              Status of the web resource              Yes – the rule is enabled, Web Control applies this rule
                                                        access rule.                            during operation.
                                                                                                No (default value) – the rule is disabled and is not used
                                                                                                when Web Control is running.

   ScheduleId                                           Schedule ID that is used in the
                                                        [Schedules.item_#] section.

   UseUrls                                              Use of a web resource address           Yes – use a web resource address filter in the rule.
                                                        filter in a rule.
                                                                                                No (default value) – do not use a web resource
                                                                                                address filter, apply the rule to all web resource
                                                                                                addresses.

   Urls.item_#                                          The address of the web resource         You can use masks to specify the web resource
                                                        for which the rule controls access.     address.




                                                                        394
                    Setting                                      Description                                        Values

UseCategories                                        Use of filters by content            None (default) – do not use a web resource content
                                                     categories and data type             filter.
                                                     categories in the rule.
                                                                                          ContentOnly – use the content category filter in the
                                                                                          rule.
                                                                                          FormatOnly – use the data type category filter in the
                                                                                          rule.
                                                                                          ContentAndFormat – use the content category filter
                                                                                          and the data type category filter in the rule.

[Rules.item_#.ContentCategories.item_#]              Section for specifying the content   –
                                                     category.

ContentCategory                                      Content categories      .            AdultContent, AlcoholTobaccoNarcotics,
                                                                                          Violence, Profanity, Weapons,
                                                                                          ChatForum, WebMail, OnlineShops,
                                                                                          SocialNets, Recruitment,
                                                                                          HttpQueryRedirection, CreditCards,
                                                                                          PoliceDecision, SoftwareAudioVideo,
                                                                                          TechnologyElectronics,
                                                                                          GamblingLotteriesSweepstakes,
                                                                                          InternetCommunicationMedia,
                                                                                          CryptocurAndMining, LegislationBE,
                                                                                          ECommerce, ComputerGames, Religions,
                                                                                          News, Torrents, FileSharing,
                                                                                          AudioAndVideo, BankSites, Blogs,
                                                                                          DatingSites, LegislationRF,
                                                                                          LegislationGlobal, SexuallyExplicit,
                                                                                          Sexuality, GenerativeAITools

[Rules.item_#.FormatCategories.item_#]               Section for specifying the data      –
                                                     type category.

FormatCategories.item_#.FormatCategory               Data type category.                  Video – Video
                                                                                          Audio – Audio data
                                                                                          OfficeDocument – Office application files
                                                                                          Executable – Executable files
                                                                                          Archives – Archives
                                                                                          Images – Image files
                                                                                          Scripts – Scripts

UsePrincipals                                        Use of a filter of users that are    Yes – use the user filter in the rule.
                                                     covered by the web resource
                                                                                          No (default value) – do not use the user filter, apply the
                                                     access rule.
                                                                                          rule to all users.

[Rules.item_#.Principals.item_#]                     Section for specifying users that
                                                     are covered by the web resource
                                                     access rule.

Name                                                 User or group of users that is       < user name > : name of the user to whom the rule
                                                     covered by the web resource          applies.
                                                     access rule.
                                                                                          @< group name > : name of the group of users to
                                                                                          whom the rule applies.
                                                                                          Default value: The web resource access rule is applied
                                                                                          for all users.

The [UrlCategories.item_#] section contains the following settings:

Name                                                 Name of the group of web
                                                     resource addresses to which the
                                                     rule controls access.



Urls.item_#                                          Address of a web resource that       You can use masks to specify the web resource
                                                     belongs to the group.                address.


                                                                      395
                      Setting                                     Description                                   Values

  The [Schedules.item_#] section contains the rule schedule.

  Id                                                  Schedule ID that is used in the   1 to 999999
                                                      [Rules.item_#] section.
                                                                                        0 is the ID of the Default schedule which lets the rule
                                                                                        work without any time limits, that is, at all times.

  Name                                                Specifies a schedule name.

  DaysHours                                           Specifies time intervals for a    < week_day > — Days of the week. You can use either
                                                      schedule.                         the full week day names or abbreviations (for example,
                                                                                        for Monday, you can specify Mo , or Mon , or Monday ).
                                                                                        For week days, you can specify intervals or specific
                                                                                        days. The week starts from Sunday.
                                                                                        < hour > — Hours [0:24]. You can specify only intervals
                                                                                        for hours.




Viewing and editing Web Control settings
To view Web Control settings, run the following command:

  kesl-control --get-settings 26 [--file <path to configuration file>] [--json]


where:

--file <path to configuration file> – full path to the configuration file to which the settings will be
exported.

--json: output data in JSON format.

To edit Web Control settings, run the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 26 [--file <path to configuration file>] [--json]


where:

--file <path to configuration file> – full path to the configuration file from which the settings will be
imported.

--json – import data from a JSON file.

To delete configured settings and reset Web Control settings to the default rule, run the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 26 --set-to-default




Rules for creating web resource address masks
A web resource address mask ("address mask") can be convenient when a lot of similar addresses of web
resources must be entered when creating a web resource access rule. One skillfully-formed address mask can
replace a large number of addresses of web resources.




                                                                     396
When creating an address mask, the following rules apply:

 1. The * character replaces any sequence of zero or more characters.
   For example, if you enter the address mask *abc*, the web resource access rule applies to all addresses
   containing the sequence abc. Example: http://www.example.com/page_0-9abcdef.html.

 2. The character sequence *. lets you select all domains of an address, i.e. it represents a domain mask. The
    domain mask *. is interpreted as any domain name, subdomain name, or an empty string.
   Example: the following addresses match the *.example.com mask:

      http://pictures.example.com – the domain mask *. matches pictures.

      http://user.pictures.example.com – the domain mask *. matches pictures. and user..

      http://example.com – the domain mask *. is interpreted as an empty string.

 3. The character sequence www. at the beginning of an address mask is interpreted as the sequence *..
   Example: The address mask www.example.com is interpreted as *.example.com. The mask matches the
   addresses www2.example.com and www.pictures.example.com.

 4. If an address mask does not begin with a * character, the address mask matches the same content that it
    would match if it started with *..

 5. If an address mask ends with a character other than / or *, the address mask matches the same content that
    it would match if it ended with /*.
   Example: the address mask http://www.example.com matches addresses of the form
   http://www.example.com/abc, where a, b, c are any characters.

 6. If an address mask ends with a / character, the address mask matches the same content that it would match if
    it ended with /*.

 7. The character sequence /* at the end of an address mask is interpreted as /* or an empty string.

 8. When web resource addresses are compared to an address mask, the protocol (http: or https:) is taken into
    consideration.

      If there is no network protocol in the address mask, the address mask matches addresses with any network
      protocol.
      Example: The address mask example.com matches the addresses http:// example.com and
      https:// example.com.

      If a network protocol is present in an address mask, only addresses with the same network protocol will
      match the address mask.
      Example: the address mask http://*.example.com matches the address http://www.example.com
      but does not match the address https://www.example.com.

 9. An address mask enclosed in double quotes is interpreted without any further substitutions, except for the *
    character if it was initially included in the address mask. For address masks enclosed in double quotes, rules 5
    and 7 are not enforced (see examples 14–18 in the table below).

10. The evaluation of a web resource address mask does not consider the user name and password, connection
    port, or case.


                                                        397
Examples of applying rules to build address masks


        No.          Address mask                   Web resource address    Does the address                  Comment
                                                                            match the address
                                                                                 mask?

   1          *.example.com                  http://www.123example.com             No           See rule 1.

   2          *.example.com                  http://www.123.example.com           Yes           See rule 2.

   3          *example.com                   http://www.123example.com            Yes           See rule 1.

   4          *example.com                   http://www.123.example.com           Yes           See rule 1.

   5          http://www.*.example.com       http://www.123example.com             No           See rule 1.

   6          www.example.com                http://www.example.com               Yes           See rules 3, 2, and 1.

   7          www.example.com                https://www.example.com              Yes           See rules 3, 2, and 1.

   8          http://www.*.example.com       http://123.example.com               Yes           See rules 3, 4, and 1.

   9          www.example.com                http://www.example.com/abc           Yes           See rules 3, 5, and 1.

   10         example.com                    http://www.example.com               Yes           See rules 3 and 1.

   11         http://example.com/            http://example.com/abc               Yes           See rule 6.

   12         http://example.com/*           http://example.com                   Yes           See rule 7.

   13         http://example.com             https://example.com                   No           See rule 8.

   14         "example.com"                  http://www.example.com                No           See rule 9.

   15         "http://www.example.com"       http://www.example.com/abc            No           See rule 9.

   16         "*.example.com"                http://www.example.com               Yes           See rules 1 and 9.

   17         "http://www.example.com/*"     http://www.example.com/abc           Yes           See rules 1 and 9.

   18         "www.example.com"              http://www.example.com;              Yes           See rules 9 and 8.
                                             https://www.example.com

   19         www.example.com/abc/123        http://www.example.com/abc            No           An address mask contains more
                                                                                                information than a web resource
                                                                                                address.




                                                                      398
System Integrity Monitoring
Kaspersky Endpoint Security monitors the integrity of the operating system on the protected device in real time or
on demand.

   System Integrity Monitoring tracks in real time changes in files and directories that you have added to the
   monitoring scope in the component settings. You can track changes in files that may indicate a security breach
   on a protected device.

   You can use the System Integrity Check tasks to check for changes in files and directories that you have added
   to the monitoring scope by comparing the current state of a monitored object with a previously recorded state.


  Using System Integrity Monitoring requires a license that includes this feature.


Upon detecting changes to files or directories in the monitoring scope, Kaspersky Endpoint Security generates
events about changes in object access control lists. System Integrity Monitoring does not share data on exact
changes that were made. The System Integrity Check task sends data on modified attributes, and moved files and
directories.




Real-time System Integrity Monitoring
System Integrity Monitoring detects each change to an object within the monitoring scope by intercepting file
operations in real time.

When System Integrity Monitoring runs, the application monitors changes in the following file settings:

   Content (write (), truncate (), etc.)

   Metadata (possession rights (chmod/chown))

   Time stamps (utimensat)

   Extended attributes ((setxattr) and others)

A file checksum is not calculated.


  The technical limitations of the Linux operating system prevent the application from identifying the user or
  process that made the changes to the file.


System Integrity Monitoring is disabled by default. You can enable, disable, and configure System Integrity
Monitoring:

   Define monitoring scopes for System Integrity Monitoring The application monitors operations on files within
   the monitoring scopes defined in the System Integrity Monitoring settings. You have to specify at least one
   monitoring scope for the component to work. The Kaspersky internal objects (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/) monitoring
   scope is defined by default.
   You can specify several monitoring scopes. You can change monitoring scopes in real-time mode.


                                                        399
       The application task does not monitor changes in files (attributes and content) with hard links that are
       outside the monitoring scope.


    You can configure exclusion of objects from monitoring with the help of name masks.

    Set up exclusion scopes for System Integrity Monitoring. Exclusions are defined for each individual monitoring
    scope and only work for the indicated scope. You can specify several monitoring exclusions.
    An exclusion has a higher priority than a monitoring scope; an excluded object is skipped even if within the
    monitoring scope. If the monitoring scope is defined on a lower level than the excluded directory, the application
    skips this monitoring scope during system integrity monitoring.


   When a directory is added to a monitoring or exclusion scope, the application does not check whether that
   directory exists.




Configuring System Integrity Monitoring in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure System Integrity Monitoring settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → Security Controls→ System Integrity Monitoring).

System Integrity Monitoring settings

                        Setting                                                                   Description

   System Integrity Monitoring enabled / disabled        This toggle switch enables or disables the System Integrity Monitoring component.
                                                         The toggle button is switched off by default.

   Monitoring scopes                                     Clicking the Configure monitoring scopes link opens the Monitoring scopes window.

   Exclusion scopes                                      Clicking the Configure monitoring exclusion scopes link opens the Exclusion scopes window.

   Exclusions by mask                                    Clicking the Configure exclusions by mask link opens the Exclusions by mask window.




Monitoring scopes window
The table contains monitoring scopes for the System Integrity Monitoring component. The application monitors
files and directories located in the paths specified in the table. By default, the table contains the Kaspersky
internal objects (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/) monitoring scope.

Monitoring scope settings for System Integrity Monitoring

     Setting                                 Description

   Scope name       Monitoring scope name.

   Path             Path to the directory that the application protects.

   Status           The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


   Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

   This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                                                                           400
  Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

  This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes, in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



Add monitoring scope window
In this window, you can add and configure monitoring scope for the System Integrity Monitoring component.

Monitoring scope settings

           Setting                                                                     Description

  Scope name                Field for entering the monitoring scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Monitoring scopes
                            window.
                            The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope            This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                            If this check box is selected, the application controls this monitoring scope during the operation.
                            If this check box is cleared, the application does not control this monitoring scope during the operation. You can later
                            include this scope in the component settings by selecting the check box.
                            The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access       Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to include in the monitoring scope. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path        specify the path. The field must not be blank.

                              You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                              You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                              in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                              You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                              character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                              The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                              You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                            The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.




                                                                       401
            Setting                                                                                Description

  Masks                          The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                                 By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                 You can add, edit, or delete masks.

                                      Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                      This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                      The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                      Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Exclusion scopes window
The table contains monitoring exclusion scopes for the System Integrity Monitoring component. The application
does not scan files and directories located at the paths specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Monitoring exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                      Description

  Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

  Path                       Path to the directory excluded from monitoring.

  Status                     Indicates whether the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the component operation.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add or configure the monitoring exclusion scope for the System Integrity Monitoring
component.




                                                                                  402
Monitoring exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                                Description

  Exclusion scope name           Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope                 The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope from monitoring when the application is running.
                                 If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the component operation.
                                 If this check box is cleared, the application monitors this scope during the component operation. You can later
                                 exclude this scope from monitoring by selecting the check box.
                                 The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access            Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path             specify the path. The field must not be blank.

                                      You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                      You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                      in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                      You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                      character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                      The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                      To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                                      The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                                      mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                                      You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                 The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

  Masks                          The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from the monitoring.
                                 By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                 You can add, edit, or delete masks.

                                      Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

                                      This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



                                      The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



                                      Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from monitoring based on name masks. The application does not scan
the files with the names containing the specified masks. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.


                                                                                  403
   Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
   can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

      Examples:
      The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
      The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
      characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Configuring System Integrity Monitoring in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure System Integrity Monitoring settings in the policy properties
(Security Controls→ System Integrity Monitoring).

System Integrity Monitoring settings
                 Setting                                                                  Description

   Enable System Integrity                 This check box enables or disables System Integrity Monitoring.
   Monitoring
                                           This check box is cleared by default.

   Monitoring scopes                       The group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Scan scopes window.

   Monitoring exclusions                   This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes
                                           window.

   Exclusions by mask                      This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window.




Scan scopes window
The table contains monitoring scopes for the System Integrity Monitoring component. The application monitors
files and directories located in the paths specified in the table. By default, the table contains one monitoring scope,
Kaspersky internal objects (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/).

Monitoring scope settings

     Setting                                 Description

   Scope name       Monitoring scope name.

   Path             Path to the directory that the application protects.

   Status           The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.


   Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

   This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



   Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

   This button is available if only one item is selected in the table.



                                                                           404
  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes, in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure monitoring scopes for the System Integrity Monitoring component.

Monitoring scope settings

            Setting                                                                       Description

  Scan scope name                Field for entering the monitoring scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope                 This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                                 If this check box is selected, the application controls this monitoring scope during the application's operation.
                                 If this check box is cleared, the application does not control this monitoring scope during the operation. You can later
                                 include this scope in the component settings by selecting the check box.
                                 The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access            Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to include in the monitoring scope.
  protocol, and path             The field must not be blank. The default path is /opt/kaspersky/kesl.

  Masks                          The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                                 By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                 You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusion scopes window
The window contains monitoring exclusion scopes for the System Integrity Monitoring component. The application
does not scan files and directories located at the paths specified in the table.

Monitoring exclusion scope settings

          Setting                                                                     Description

  Merge inherited           This check box enables or disables the merging of the list when inherited in child policies.
  values
                            If the check box is selected, items in the list of the parent policy are displayed in child policies, and items can be added to
                            the list of the child policy.
                            If the check box is cleared, the list items are not merged when inheriting policy settings.
                            This check box is cleared by default.

  Exclusion scope           Exclusion scope name.
  name




                                                                          405
          Setting                                                                              Description

  Path                      Path to the directory excluded from monitoring.

  Status                    Indicates whether the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the component operation.


By default, the table of exclusion scopes is empty. You can add, edit, or delete items in the table.

You can also import the list of exclusion scopes from a file by clicking Import or export the list of exclusion scopes
to a file in JSON format by clicking Export. When importing, you are prompted to replace the list of exclusion
scopes or add exclusion scopes to the existing list.



<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add or configure the monitoring exclusion scope for the System Integrity Monitoring
component.

Monitoring exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                                                Description

  Exclusion scope name         Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                               The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope               The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope from monitoring when the application is running.
                               If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the component operation.
                               If this check box is cleared, the application monitors this scope during the component operation. You can later exclude
                               this scope from monitoring by selecting the check box.
                               The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access          Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. The field must not be blank.
  protocol, and path           The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

  Masks                        The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from the monitoring.
                               By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                               You can add, edit, or delete masks.
                               Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
                               specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from monitoring.

                                  Examples:
                                  The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
                                  The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two characters (for
                                  example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from monitoring based on name masks. The application does not scan
the files with the names containing the specified masks. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.

Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from monitoring.

  Examples:
  The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
  The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two characters (for
  example, 2020_my_file_09.html).



                                                                                 406
You can also import the list of exclusions from a file by clicking Import and export the list of exclusions to a file in
JSON format by clicking Export. When importing, you will be prompted to replace the list of exclusions or add the
exclusions to the existing list.

You can enable the merging of the list of exclusions when inherited by child policies. If you want to merge list items,
select the Merge inherited values check box. If the check box is selected, items in the list of the parent policy are
displayed in child policies, and items can be added to the list of the child policy. If the check box is cleared, the list
items are not merged when inheriting policy settings. This check box is cleared by default.



Configuring System Integrity Monitoring in the command line
You can manage system integrity monitoring in real time in the command line by using the System Integrity
Monitoring predefined task (System_Integrity_Monitoring). Task type: OAFIM.

The System Integrity Monitoring task does not run by default. You can start and stop the task manually.

You can configure System Integrity Monitoring on the device by editing the settings of the System Integrity
Monitoring predefined task.

On-access System Integrity Monitoring task settings

           Setting                                       Description                                                     Values

   UseExcludeMasks             Enables exclusion of the objects specified by the                Yes — Exclude the objects specified by the
                               ExcludeThreats.item_# setting from the monitoring                ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the monitoring
                               scope.                                                           scope.
                               This setting only applies if a value is specified for the        No (default value) — Do not exclude the objects
                               ExcludeMasks.item_# setting.                                     specified by the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from
                                                                                                the monitoring scope.

   ExcludeMasks.item_#         Excludes objects from monitoring by names or masks. You          The default value is not defined.
                               can use this setting to exclude an individual file from the
                               specified scan scope by name or exclude several files at
                               once using masks in the shell format.
                               Before specifying a value for this setting, make sure that the
                               UseExcludeMasks setting is enabled.
                               You can specify several masks. Each mask must be specified
                               on a new line with a new index.

  The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the monitoring scopes of the System Integrity Monitoring task. At least one monitoring scope must be
  specified for the task. You can specify several [ScanScope.item_#] sections in any order. The application processes the scopes by index in
  ascending order.
  The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   AreaDesc                    Description of monitoring scope; contains additional             The default value is not defined.
                               information about the monitoring scope.

   UseScanArea                 Enables monitoring of the specified scope.                       Yes (default value) — Monitor the specified scope.
                                                                                                No — Do not monitor the specified scope.




                                                                           407
        Setting                                    Description                                                       Values

Path                       Path to the monitoring directory.                              You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                                            You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                            directory name mask.

                                                                                            You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                            set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the
                                                                                            / character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                            /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                            You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                            represent any set of characters (including an empty set
                                                                                            and the / character) in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                            example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                            The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name.
                                                                                            For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                            You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                            character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                          Default value: /opt/kaspersky/kesl/

AreaMask.item_#            Monitoring scope limitation. Within the monitoring scope,      Default value: * (all objects are monitored)
                           the application scans only the objects that are specified
                           using the masks in the shell format.
                           You can specify several AreaMask.item_# items in any
                           order. The application processes the scopes by index in
                           ascending order.

[ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] contains objects to be excluded from all [ScanScope.item_#] sections. You can specify multiple
[ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] sections in any order. The application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.
The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                   Description of the monitoring exclusion scope, which           The default value is not defined.
                           contains additional information about the monitoring
                           exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                Excludes the specified scope from monitoring.                  Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope
                                                                                          from monitoring.
                                                                                          No — Do not exclude the specified scope from
                                                                                          monitoring.

Path                       Path to the directory with objects excluded from monitoring.   You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                                            You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                            directory name mask.

                                                                                            You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                            set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the
                                                                                            / character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                            /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                            You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                            represent any set of characters (including an empty set
                                                                                            and the / character) in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                            example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                            The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name.
                                                                                            For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                            You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                            character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                          The default value is not defined.

AreaMask.item_#            Limitation of monitoring exclusion scope. In the monitoring    Default value: * (exclude all objects from monitoring)
                           exclusion scope, the application only excludes the objects
                           that are specified using masks in the shell format.
                           You can specify several AreaMask.item_# items in any
                           order. The application processes the scopes by index in
                           ascending order.




                                                                    408
System Integrity Check
When the System Integrity Check task is running, a change in each object is found by comparing the current state
of the monitored object with its original state. The following comparison criteria can be used:

   File hash

   File change time

   File size

The initial state of monitored objects is recorded as a baseline. The baseline contains paths to monitored objects
and their metadata.


  A baseline may also contain personal data.


A system baseline is created when a System Integrity Check task runs on the device for the first time. If you have
created multiple System Integrity Check tasks, a separate baseline is created for each. The task is only executed if
the baseline contains information about objects that belong to the monitoring scope defined for the task. If the
baseline does not match the monitoring scope, Kaspersky Endpoint Security generates a system integrity violation
event.

The baseline is updated whenever the task settings are modified (for example, when a new monitoring scope is
added), as well as when the task is started with RebuildBaseline=Yes (or if the Rebuild baseline on each task
start check box is selected in the task properties in Kaspersky Security Center).

The application creates a baseline storage on the protected device. By default, the storage for baselines is located
in /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/fim.db. Root privileges are required to access a database that contains
baselines.

You can delete a baseline by deleting the appropriate System Integrity Check task.

You can run a system integrity check on demand and configure the scan settings:

   Enable or disable baseline rebuild every time a system integrity check task finishes.

   Select criteria for comparing the current state of the monitored file with the original state: use the file hash and
   change time, or only the file size.

   Configure monitoring scopes for checking system integrity.

   Configure exclusion scopes from the system integrity check. You can specify paths to excluded files and
   directories, and exclude individual objects by name mask.



Configuring System Integrity Check in the Web Console
You can run a system integrity check in the Web Console with the help of the System Integrity Check task.



                                                        409
You can create and run user system integrity check tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the
settings of the tasks.

System Integrity Check task settings

         Setting                                                                              Description

  Rebuild baseline on       This check box enables or disables the reestablishment of a system baseline upon every start of the System Integrity
  each task start           Check task.
                            This check box is cleared by default.

  Check SHA256 hash         This check box enables or disables the use of the file hash as a criterion when comparing the current state of the file with
                            its original state.
                            If this check box is cleared, the application compares only the file size (if the file size has not changed, then the
                            modification time is not considered a critical parameter).
                            This check box is cleared by default.

  Track directories in      This check box enables or disables directory monitoring while system integrity check is running.
  monitoring scopes         This check box is cleared by default.

  Track the last time a     This check box enables or disables tracking the file access time while the system integrity check runs.
  file was accessed         This check box is cleared by default.

  Monitoring scopes         The table that contains the monitoring scopes scanned by the task.
                            By default, the table contains the Kaspersky internal objects (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/) monitoring scope.
                            You can add, configure, delete, move up, or move down monitoring scopes in the table.

                              Clicking the Move down button moves the selected item down in the table.

                              Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If you
                              want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory, you
                              must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                              This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                              Clicking the Move up button moves the selected item up in the table.

                              Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes in the order they are listed in the table of scan scopes. If you
                              want to configure security settings for a subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory, you
                              must place the subdirectory higher than its parent directory in the table.

                              This button is available if a scope is selected in the table.



                              Clicking the Delete button excludes the selected scope from scans.

                              This button is available if at least one scan scope is selected in the table.



                              Clicking the scan scope name opens the <Scan scope name> window. In this window, you can modify the settings of the selected
                              scan scope.



                              Clicking the Add button opens the <New scan scope> window. In this window, you can define a new scan scope.




Add scan scope window
In this window, you can add or configure the monitoring scope for the System Integrity Check task.




                                                                               410
Monitoring scope settings

            Setting                                                                            Description

  Scope name                     Field for entering the monitoring scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan settings section.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope                 This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                                 If this check box is selected, the application controls this monitoring scope during the application's operation.
                                 If this check box is cleared, the application does not control this monitoring scope during the operation. You can later
                                 include this scope in the component settings by selecting the check box.
                                 The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access            Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to include in the monitoring scope. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path             specify the path.

                                      You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                      You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                      in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                      You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                      character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                      The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                      You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                 The field must not be blank.
                                 The / path is specified by default – the application scans all directories of the local file system.

  Masks                          The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                                 By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                 You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusion scopes section
In the Exclusion scopes section for the System Integrity Check task, you can also configure exclusion scopes for
the scan and exclusions by mask.



Exclusion scopes window
The table contains monitoring exclusion scopes for the System Integrity Check component. The application does
not scan files and directories located at the paths specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Monitoring exclusion scope settings

           Setting                                                             Description

  Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

  Path                       Path to the directory excluded from monitoring.

  Status                     Indicates whether the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the task operation.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




                                                                               411
  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens a window where you can specify the new item settings.




Add exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure the monitoring exclusion scope for the System Integrity Check task.

Monitoring exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                           Description

  Exclusion scope name           Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope                 The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope from monitoring when the application is running.
                                 If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the task operation.
                                 If this check box is cleared, the application monitors this scope during the task operation. You can later exclude this
                                 scope from monitoring by selecting the check box.
                                 The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access            Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path             specify the path.

                                      You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                      You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                      in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                      You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                      character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                      The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                      You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                 The field must not be blank.
                                 The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.

  Masks                          The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from the monitoring.
                                 By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                 You can add, edit, or delete masks.




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from monitoring based on name masks. The application does not scan
the files with the names containing the specified masks. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.

                                                                               412
  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

     Examples:
     The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
     The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
     characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Configuring System Integrity Check in the Administration
Console
You can perform a system integrity check in the Administration Console, with the help of the System Integrity
Check task.

You can create and run user system integrity check tasks. You can configure the scan settings by editing the
settings of the tasks.

In the Settings section of the properties of the System Integrity Check task, you can edit the settings listed in the
table below.

System Integrity Check task settings

             Setting                                                                         Description

  Rebuild baseline on each             This check box enables or disables the reestablishment of a system baseline upon every start of the System
  task start                           Integrity Check task.
                                       This check box is cleared by default.

  Check SHA256 hash                    This check box enables or disables the use of the file hash as a criterion when comparing the current state of the
                                       file with its original state.
                                       If this check box is cleared, the application compares only the file size (if the file size has not changed, then the
                                       modification time is not considered a critical parameter).
                                       This check box is cleared by default.

  Track directories in                 This check box enables or disables scanning of directories within the specified monitoring scopes during a system
  monitoring scopes                    integrity check.
                                       This check box is cleared by default.

  Track the last time a file was       This check box enables or disables tracking the file access time while the system integrity check runs.
  accessed                             This check box is cleared by default.

  Monitoring scopes                    The group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Scan scopes window.


Under Exclusion scopes in the properties of the System Integrity Check, you can define monitoring exclusions and
exclusions by mask.



Scan scopes window
The table contains monitoring scopes for the System Integrity Check task. The application monitors files and
directories located in the paths specified in the table. By default, the table contains one monitoring scope,
Kaspersky internal objects (/opt/kaspersky/kesl/).




                                                                            413
Monitoring scope settings

     Setting                                   Description

  Scope name         Monitoring scope name.

  Path               Path to the directory that the application protects.

  Status             The status indicates whether the application scans this scope.


You can add, edit, delete, move up, and move down items in the table.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans objects in the specified scopes, in the order they appear in the list of scopes. If
necessary, place the subdirectory higher in the list than its parent directory, to configure security settings for a
subdirectory that are different from the security settings of the parent directory.



<New scan scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure monitoring scopes for the System Integrity Check task.

Monitoring scope settings

           Setting                                                                            Description

  Scan scope name                 Field for entering the monitoring scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Scan scopes window.
                                  The entry field must not be blank.

  Use this scope                  This check box enables or disables scans of this scope by the application.
                                  If this check box is selected, the application controls this monitoring scope during the application's operation.
                                  If this check box is cleared, the application does not control this monitoring scope during the operation. You can later
                                  include this scope in the component settings by selecting the check box.
                                  The check box is selected by default.

  File system, access             Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to include in the monitoring scope. You can use masks to
  protocol, and path              specify the path.

                                     You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                     You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                     in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                     You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                     character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                     The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                     You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                  The field must not be blank.
                                  The default path is /opt/kaspersky/kesl.

  Masks                           The list contains name masks for the objects that the application scans.
                                  By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                                  You can add, edit, or delete masks.




                                                                              414
Exclusion scopes section
Settings of scan exclusions

   Group of settings                                                                    Description

   Monitoring             This group of settings contains the Configure button. Clicking this button opens the Exclusion scopes window. In this
   exclusions             window, you can define the list of scopes to be excluded from monitoring.

   Exclusions by          This group of settings contains the Configure button, which opens the Exclusions by mask window. In this window, you can
   mask                   configure the exclusion of objects from monitoring by name mask.




Exclusion scopes window
The table contains scan exclusion scopes for the System Integrity Check component. The application does not
scan files and directories located at the paths specified in the table. By default, the table is empty.

Scan exclusion scope settings for the System Integrity Check task

            Setting                                                                Description

   Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

   Path                       Path to the directory excluded from scan.

   Status                     Indicates whether the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the component operation.


You can add, edit, or delete items in the table.



<New exclusion scope> window
In this window, you can add and configure the monitoring exclusion scope for the System Integrity Check task.

Monitoring exclusion scope settings

             Setting                                                                        Description

   Exclusion scope name          Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in the table in the Exclusion scopes window.
                                 The entry field must not be blank.

   Use this scope                The check box enables or disables the exclusion of the scope from monitoring when the application is running.
                                 If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope from monitoring during the task operation.
                                 If this check box is cleared, the application monitors this scope during the task operation. You can later exclude this
                                 scope from monitoring by selecting the check box.
                                 The check box is selected by default.

   File system, access           Entry field for the path to the local directory that you want to add to the exclusion scope. You can use masks to
   protocol, and path            specify the path.

                                   You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                   You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in
                                   the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                   You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                   character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                   The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                   You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                                 The field must not be blank.
                                 The / path is specified by default. The application excludes all directories of the local file system from scan.


                                                                             415
          Setting                                                                              Description

  Masks                      The list contains name masks of the objects that the application excludes from the monitoring.
                             By default the list contains the * mask (all objects).
                             You can add, edit, or delete masks.
                             Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you can
                             specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

                                Examples:
                                The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
                                The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two characters (for
                                example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Exclusions by mask window
You can configure the exclusion of objects from monitoring based on name masks. The application does not scan
the files with the names containing the specified masks. By default, the list of masks is empty.

You can add, edit, or delete masks.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.



  The selected element's settings are changed in a separate window.



  Clicking the Add button opens the Object mask window. In this window, in the Define object mask field, you
  can specify the name template for files that Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes from scans.

    Examples:
    The *.txt mask refers to all text files.
    The *_my_file_??.html mask refers to html files starting with any characters, and ending with _my_file_ followed by any two
    characters (for example, 2020_my_file_09.html).




Configuring System Integrity Check in the command line
You can run a system integrity check on a device in the command line by using user System Integrity Check tasks
(ODFIM tasks).

You can manually start, stop, pause, or resume user tasks and configure the task schedule. You can configure
system integrity checking by editing the settings of these tasks.




                                                                              416
System Integrity Check task settings

            Setting                                       Description                                                       Values

   RebuildBaseline                Enables baseline to rebuild after the System Integrity         Yes : rebuild the baseline every time the System
                                  Check task finishes.                                          Integrity Check task finishes.
                                                                                                No (default): do not rebuild the baseline every time the
                                                                                                System Integrity Check task finishes.

   CheckFileHash                  Use the file hash (SHA256) as a criterion when                Yes : check the hash.
                                  comparing the current state of the monitored file with
                                                                                                 No (default value) — Disable hash check. If this check is
                                  its original state.
                                                                                                disabled, the application compares only the file size (if
                                                                                                the file size has not changed, then the modification time
                                                                                                is not considered a critical parameter).

   TrackDirectoryChanges          Enables directory monitoring.                                 Yes : monitor directories while checking system integrity.
                                                                                                No (default value) — Do not monitor directories.

   TrackLastAccessTime            Enables tracking last file access time. In the Linux          Yes — Track last file access time.
                                  operating systems it is the noatime setting.
                                                                                                No (default value) — Do not track last file access time.

   UseExcludeMasks                Enables monitoring scope exclusions for objects               Yes — Exclude the objects specified by the
                                  specified by the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting.                 ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from the monitoring
                                  This setting only applies if a value is specified for the     scope.
                                  ExcludeMasks.item_# setting.                                  No (default value) — Do not exclude the objects
                                                                                                specified by the ExcludeMasks.item_# setting from
                                                                                                the monitoring scope.

   ExcludeMasks.item_#            Excludes objects from monitoring by names or masks.           The default value is not defined.
                                  You can use this setting to exclude an individual file from
                                  the specified scan scope by name or exclude several
                                  files at once using masks in the shell format.
                                  Before specifying a value for this setting, make sure that
                                  the UseExcludeMasks setting is enabled.
                                  You can specify several masks. Each mask must be
                                  specified on a new line with a new index.

  The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the monitoring scopes of the System Integrity Check. At least one monitoring scope must be specified
  for the task. You can specify several [ScanScope.item_#] sections in any order. The application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.
  The [ScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

   AreaDesc                       Description of monitoring scope; contains additional          The default value is not defined.
                                  information about the monitoring scope.

   UseScanArea                    Enables monitoring of the specified scope.                    Yes (default value) — Monitor the specified scope.
                                                                                                No — Do not monitor the specified scope.

   Path                           Path to the monitoring directory.                             You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                                                  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                                  directory name mask.

                                                                                                  You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                                  set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the
                                                                                                  / character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                                  /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                                  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                                  represent any set of characters (including an empty set
                                                                                                  and the / character) in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                                  example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                                  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name.
                                                                                                  For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                                  You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                                  character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                                Default value: /opt/kaspersky/kesl/




                                                                           417
         Setting                                    Description                                                     Values

AreaMask.item_#               Monitoring scope limitation. Within the monitoring        Default value: * (all objects are monitored)
                              scope, the application scans only the objects that are
                              specified using the masks in the shell format.
                              You can specify several AreaMask.item_# items in any
                              order. The application processes the scopes by index in
                              ascending order.

The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the objects to be excluded from all [ScanScope.item_#] sections. You can specify
several [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] sections in any order. The application processes the scopes by index in ascending order.
The [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_#] section contains the following settings:

AreaDesc                      Description of the monitoring exclusion scope, which      The default value is not defined.
                              contains additional information about the monitoring
                              exclusion scope.

UseScanArea                   Excludes the specified scope from monitoring.             Yes (default value) — Exclude the specified scope from
                                                                                        monitoring.
                                                                                        No — Do not exclude the specified scope from
                                                                                        monitoring.

Path                          Path to the directory with objects excluded from          You can use masks to specify the path.
                              monitoring.
                                                                                          You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                          directory name mask.

                                                                                          You can indicate a single * character to represent any
                                                                                          set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the
                                                                                          / character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                          /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                          You can indicate two consecutive * characters to
                                                                                          represent any set of characters (including an empty set
                                                                                          and the / character) in the file or directory name. For
                                                                                          example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                          The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name.
                                                                                          For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                          You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                          character in the file or directory name.


                                                                                        The default value is not defined.

AreaMask.item_#               Limitation of monitoring exclusion scope. In the          Default value: * (exclude all objects from monitoring)
                              monitoring exclusion scope, the application only
                              excludes the objects that are specified using masks in
                              the shell format.
                              You can specify several AreaMask.item_# items in any
                              order. The application processes the scopes by index in
                              ascending order.




                                                                    418
Behavior Detection
The Behavior Detection component allows you to monitor for any malicious activity from applications in the
operating system. When malicious activity is detected, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can terminate the process of
the application that performs malicious activity.

The Behavior Detection component is enabled automatically with the default settings when Kaspersky Endpoint
Security starts.

You can enable, disable, and configure Behavior Detection:

   Select an action to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security upon detecting malicious activity in the
   operating system: inform the user or block the application that performs malicious activity.

   Exclude process activity from scans.


  If integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response is
  enabled, exclusions by process are skipped when detecting application behavior in the operating system.


By default, on the SintezM-Client operating system, the auditd service configuration is protected from
modification, that is, it is in enabled 2 mode. For correct operation of the Behavior Detection component when
Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response and Kaspersky Anti
Targeted Attack Platform solutions, change the auditd mode in the configuration files to enabled 1 (no
configuration blocking) and restart the operating system.


  If the root user does not have access to a remote directory mounted on the device over the NFSv4 protocol,
  the application blocks access to such a file for all users.




Configuring Behavior Detection in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Behavior Detection settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → Advanced Threat Protection → Behavior Detection).

Behavior Detection component settings

           Setting                                                                 Description

  Behavior Detection          This toggle button enables or disables the Behavior Detection component.
  enabled / disabled
                              The check toggle button is switched on by default.

  Action on malware           The action to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security upon detecting malicious activity in the operating
  activity detection          system:
                                  Inform user. Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not terminate the process that performs malicious activity; it only
                                  records the detection of malicious activity in the event log.
                                  Block the application that performs malicious activity (default value). Kaspersky Endpoint Security terminates the
                                  process that performs malicious activity and logs information about the detected malicious activity.

  Exclusions by process       Clicking the Configure exclusions by process link opens the Exclusions by process window. In this window, you can
                              exclude the activity of processes.




                                                                     419
Exclusions by process window
The table contains the exclusion scopes for exclusion by process The exclusion scope for exclusion by process lets
you exclude the activity of the indicated process and files modified by the indicated process. By default, the table
is empty.


   If integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response is
   enabled, exclusions by process are not applied.


Exclusion scope settings for exclusion by process

                        Setting                                                                  Description

   Exclude / Do not exclude trusted processes         The switch enables or disables the configured exclusions by process in the operation of the
   from scans                                         Behavior Detection component.
                                                      The toggle button is switched off by default.

   Exclusion scope name                               Exclusion scope name.

   Path                                               Full path to excluded process.

   Status                                             The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

   This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


You can also import the list of exclusions from a file by clicking Import and export the list of added exclusions to a
file by clicking Export. When importing, you will be prompted to replace the list of exclusions or add the exclusions
to the existing list.



Adding a process exclusion scope window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes for exclusion by process.

Exclusion scope settings

            Setting                                                                    Description

   Process-based exclusion        Field for entering the Process-based exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in a table in the Exclusions by
   scope name                     process window.
                                  The entry field must not be blank.

   Use this exclusion             This check box enables or disables this scan scope exclusion when the application is running.
                                  The check box is selected by default.




                                                                          420
           Setting                                                                       Description

  Path to excluded process     Full path to the process you want to exclude from scans. You can use masks to specify the path.

                                 You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                 You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                                 in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                 You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                 character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                 The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                 You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                               The entry field must not be blank.

  Apply to child processes     Exclude child processes of the excluded process indicated by the Path to excluded process setting.
                               This check box is cleared by default.




Configuring Behavior Detection in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Behavior Detection settings in the policy properties (Advanced
Threat Protection → Behavior Detection).

Behavior Detection component settings

          Setting                                                                       Description

  Enable Behavior            This check box enables or disables the Behavior Detection component.
  Detection                  The check box is selected by default.

  Action on malware          The action to be performed by Kaspersky Endpoint Security upon detecting malicious activity in the operating system:
  activity detection             Block the application that performs malicious activity (default value). Kaspersky Endpoint Security terminates the
                                 process that performs malicious activity and logs information about the detected malicious activity.
                                 Inform user. Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not terminate the process that performs malicious activity; it only
                                 records the detection of malicious activity in the event log.

  Use exclusions by          This check box enables or disables exclusions by process in the operation of the Behavior Detection component.
  process                    This check box is cleared by default.
                             The Configure button opens the Exclusions by process window. In this window, you can exclude the activity of
                             processes.




Exclusions by process window
The table contains the exclusion scopes for exclusion by process The exclusion scope for exclusion by process lets
you exclude the activity of an indicated process. By default, the table is empty.


  If integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response is
  enabled, exclusions by process are not applied.




                                                                          421
Exclusion scope settings for exclusion by process

            Setting                                        Description

   Exclusion scope name       Exclusion scope name.

   Path                       Full path to excluded process.

   Status                     The status indicates whether the application uses this exclusion.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


   Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.

   This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.


You can also import the list of exclusions from a file by clicking Advanced -> Import and export the list of added
exclusions to a file by clicking Advanced -> Export selected or Advanced -> Export all. When importing, you will be
prompted to replace the list of exclusions or add the exclusions to the existing list.



Trusted process window
In this window, you can add and configure exclusion scopes for exclusion by process.

Exclusion scope settings for exclusion by process

          Setting                                                                        Description

   Exclusion scope         Field for entering the exclusion scope name. This name will be displayed in a table in the Exclusions by process window.
   name

   Path to excluded        Full path to the process you want to exclude from scans. You can use masks to specify the path.
   process
                             You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                             You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character in the
                             file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                             You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the / character) in
                             the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                             The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                             You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



                           The entry field must not be blank.

   Apply to child          Exclude child processes of the excluded process indicated by the Path to excluded process setting.
   processes
                           This check box is cleared by default.

   Use this scope          The check box enables or disables this exclusion scope.
                           If this check box is selected, the application excludes this scope.
                           If this check box is cleared, the application includes this scope. You can later exclude this scope by selecting the check box.
                           The check box is selected by default.




Configuring Behavior Detection in the command line
You can manage application Behavior Detection in the operating system via the command line by using the
Behavior_Detection predefined task.


                                                                             422
The Behavior Detection task runs by default. You can start and stop the task manually.

You can configure Behavior Detection by editing the settings of the Behavior Detection predefined task.

Behavior Detection task setting

          Setting                            Description                                                               Values

   TaskMode                   Action performed by the application            Block (default value) – terminate the process of the application
                              when malicious activity is detected in the     performing malicious activity.
                              operating system.
                                                                              Notify – do not terminate the process performing malicious activity; only
                                                                             log detection of malicious activity in the event log.

   UseTrustedPrograms         Excluding processes from scans.                    Yes – do not scan the activity of the indicated processes.
                                                                                 No (default value) – scan all processes.



                                                                                   If integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky
                                                                                   Managed Detection and Response is enabled, exclusions by process
                                                                                   are not applied.



  The [TrustedPrograms.item_#] section contains processes that are excluded from scans. Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not monitor the
  activity of the specified processes.

   ProgramPath                Path to excluded process.                       < full path to process > – Do not scan the process in the indicated
                                                                             local directory. You can use masks to specify the path.

                                                                                   You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                                                                                   You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters
                                                                                   (including an empty set) preceding the / character in the file or directory
                                                                                   name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                   You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of
                                                                                   characters (including an empty set and the / character) in the file or directory
                                                                                   name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                   The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example,
                                                                                   /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                   You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or
                                                                                   directory name.




   ApplyToDescendants         Exclude child processes of the excluded            Yes – exclude the specified process and all its child processes from scans.
                              process specified by the ProgramPath
                                                                             No (default value) – exclude only the specified process from scans, do not
                              setting from scans.
                                                                             exclude its child processes from scans.

   ProgramDesc                Description of the excluded process.

   UseTrustedProgram          Enables the exclusion of the specified         Yes (default value) - enable exclusion of the specified process from
                              process from scanning.                         scanning.
                                                                                 No - do not exclude the specified process from scanning.




                                                                           423
Using Kaspersky Security Network

  The KSN functionality may not be available in the application in the territory of the USA.


To increase the protection of devices and user data, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can use Kaspersky's cloud-
based knowledge base Kaspersky Security Network (KSN) to check the reputation of files, Internet resources, and
software. Using Kaspersky Security Network data ensures a faster response to various threats, high protection
component performance, and fewer false positives.

Use of Kaspersky Security Network is voluntary. You can start or stop using KSN at any time.


Kaspersky Security Network infrastructure solutions

Kaspersky Endpoint Security supports the following infrastructure solutions to work with Kaspersky reputation
databases:

   Kaspersky Security Network (KSN) – A solution that receives information from Kaspersky and sends data about
   objects detected on user devices to Kaspersky for additional verification by Kaspersky analysts and to add to
   reputation and statistical databases.

   Kaspersky Private Security Network (KPSN) – A solution that allows users of devices with Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security installed to access the reputation databases of Kaspersky, as well as other statistical data, without
   sending data to Kaspersky from their devices. KPSN is designed for corporate clients who can't use Kaspersky
   Security Network, for example, for the following reasons:

      No connection of local workplaces to the Internet

      Legal prohibition or corporate security restrictions on sending any data outside the country or the
      organization's local network


  To use KPSN after activating application under a new license, inform the service provider about the new
  license key. Otherwise, an authentication error will prevent data exchange with KPSN.



Kaspersky Security Network usage options:

There are two options for using KSN:

   Extended KSN mode – you can receive information from the Kaspersky knowledge base, while Kaspersky
   Endpoint Security automatically sends statistical information to Kaspersky Security Network that it obtained
   during its operation. The application can also send to Kaspersky for additional scanning certain files (or parts of
   files) that intruders can use to harm the device or data.

   Basic KSN mode – you can receive information from the Kaspersky knowledge base, but Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security does not send anonymous statistics and data about the types and sources of threats.




                                                        424
You can choose to use Kaspersky Security Network using the Web Console, the Administration Console, or the
command line.


  No personal data is obtained, processed, or stored. Detailed information about the storage, and destruction,
  and/or submission to Kaspersky of statistical information generated during participation in KSN is available in
  the Kaspersky Security Network Statement and on Kaspersky's website . The file with the text
  of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement is included in the application distribution kit.



Cloud mode for Kaspersky Endpoint Security

Cloud mode is an operating mode of Kaspersky Endpoint Security that uses a lightweight version of the malware
databases. This lets you reduce the load on device memory.

Kaspersky Security Network facilitates the application's use of the lightweight malware databases.

You can enable cloud mode if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running in standard mode and using KSN.


  Lightweight anti-malware databases are not supported if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running in Light
  Agent mode for protecting virtual environments. The application receives special databases required for Light
  Agent operation from Protection Server.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security switches to using a lightweight version of the malware databases after enabling cloud
mode and performing the latest update of the application databases and modules. If cloud mode is disabled,
Kaspersky Endpoint Security downloads the full version of the application databases from Kaspersky servers
during the next update of application databases and modules.

If you are not using KSN or cloud mode is disabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses the full version of the
application databases.

Cloud mode is disabled automatically if use of KSN is disabled.


Using the KSN Proxy service

User devices managed by Administration Server can communicate with KSN directly or via the KSN Proxy service
on the Administration Server.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the KSN Proxy
  service supports communication with the KSN infrastructure. Direct communication with KSN is not
  supported. If the KSN proxy is not available, KSN is not used by the application.


A KSN proxy server provides the following capabilities:

   The user's device can query KSN and submit information to KSN, even without direct access to the Internet.

   A KSN proxy server caches processed data, thereby reducing the load on the external network connection and
   speeding up receipt of the information that is requested by the user's device.

You can configure the KSN proxy server settings in the Administration Server properties. For details about the KSN
proxy server, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help.

                                                          425
If you are using Kaspersky Endpoint Security in standard mode, you use the Web Console or the Administration
Console to enable or disable communication with KSN servers directly if the KSN proxy service is unavailable.




Configuring the use of Kaspersky Security Network in
the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure the use of Kaspersky Security Network in Kaspersky Endpoint Security in
the policy properties (Application settings → Advanced Threat Protection → Kaspersky Security Network).

You can read the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement in the Kaspersky Security Network
Statement window, which can be opened by clicking the Kaspersky Security Network Statement link.

Kaspersky Security Center displays information about the availability of KSN via the client device status (OK,
Critical, Warning) in the list of managed devices on the Assets (Devices) tab.

Kaspersky Security Network settings

          Setting                                                                   Description

  Do not use KSN            By selecting this option, you decline to use Kaspersky Security Network.

  Extended KSN mode         By selecting this option, you accept the terms of using Kaspersky Security Network. You will be able to receive
                            information from Kaspersky online knowledge base about the reputation of files, web resources, and software. Also,
                            anonymous statistics and information about the types and sources of various threats will be sent to Kaspersky to
                            improve Kaspersky Security Network.

  Basic KSN mode            By selecting this option, you accept the terms of using Kaspersky Security Network. You will be able to receive
                            information from Kaspersky online knowledge base about the reputation of files, web resources, and software.

  Enable cloud mode         The check box enables or disables the operating mode in which Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses a lightweight version
                            of the malware databases.
                            The check box is available if use of KSN is enabled.
                            The check box is selected if, when creating a policy, you accepted the terms of the Kaspersky Security Network
                            Statement and are using KSN in extended mode.
                            The mode is enabled or disabled after the next application database update.


                               This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




  Use KSN servers           The check box enables or disables the ability to communicate with KSN servers directly when the KSN Proxy service is
  when KSN Proxy is         unavailable.
  not available             The check box is selected by default.


                               This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




  Kaspersky Security        This link opens the Kaspersky Security Network Statement window, where you can read the text of the Kaspersky
  Network Statement         Security Network Statement.




Kaspersky Security Network Statement
In this window, you can read the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement and accept its terms and
conditions.




                                                                        426
Kaspersky Security Network settings

                          Setting                                                                  Description

  I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and        By selecting this option, you confirm that you want to use the Kaspersky Security
  accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky         Network, and you have fully read, understood, and accept the terms and conditions of
  Security Network Statement                               the Kaspersky Security Network Statement that is displayed.

  I do not accept the terms and conditions of the          By selecting this option, you confirm that you do not want to use Kaspersky Security
  Kaspersky Security Network Statement                     Network.




Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement
In this window, you can read the text of the Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement and accept its terms
and conditions.

Kaspersky Security Network settings

                          Setting                                                                 Description

  I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and      By selecting this option, you confirm that you want to participate in the Kaspersky
  accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky       Security Network, and you have fully read, understood, and accept the terms and
  Security Network Statement                             conditions of the Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement that is displayed.

  I do not accept the terms and conditions of the        By selecting this option, you confirm that you do not want to use Kaspersky Security
  Kaspersky Security Network Statement                   Network.




Configuring the use of Kaspersky Security Network in
the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure the use of Kaspersky Security Network in Kaspersky Endpoint
Security in the policy properties (Advanced Threat Protection → Kaspersky Security Network).

You can read the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement in the Kaspersky Security Network
Statement window, which can be opened by clicking the Kaspersky Security Network Statement link.

Kaspersky Security Center displays information about the availability of KSN via the client device status (OK,
Critical, Warning) in the list of managed devices on the Devices tab.

Kaspersky Security Network settings

                Setting                                                                  Description

  Kaspersky Security Network            Clicking this link opens the Kaspersky Security Network Statement window. In this window, you can read
  Statement                             the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement.

  Kaspersky Security Network            This block displays information about the KSN mode or indicates that KSN is not used by Kaspersky
  (KSN)                                 Endpoint Security.
                                        The Edit button opens a window where you can configure the use of Kaspersky Security Network.

  Enable cloud mode                     The check box enables or disables the operating mode in which Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses a
                                        lightweight version of the malware databases.
                                        The check box is available if use of KSN is enabled.
                                        The check box is selected if, when creating a policy, you accepted the terms of the Kaspersky Security
                                        Network Statement and are using KSN in extended mode.
                                        The mode is enabled or disabled after the next application database update.


                                           This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




                                                                      427
                   Setting                                                                     Description

  Use KSN servers when KSN Proxy             The check box enables or disables the ability to communicate with KSN servers directly when the KSN Proxy
  is not available                           service is unavailable.
                                             The check box is selected by default.



                                                 This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode.




Kaspersky Security Network settings
In this window, you can configure Kaspersky Security Network participation settings.

Kaspersky Security Network settings

         Setting                                                                       Description

  More info                   Clicking this link opens the Kaspersky website.

  Do not use                  By selecting this option, you decline to use Kaspersky Security Network.
  Kaspersky Security
  Network

  Basic KSN mode              By selecting this option, you accept the terms of using Kaspersky Security Network. You will be able to receive information
                              from Kaspersky's online knowledge base about the reputation of files, web resources, and software.

  Extended KSN                By selecting this option, you accept the terms of using Kaspersky Security Network. You will be able to receive information
  mode                        from Kaspersky's online knowledge base about the reputation of files, web resources, and software. Also, anonymous
                              statistics and information about the types and sources of various threats will be sent to Kaspersky to improve Kaspersky
                              Security Network.

  Kaspersky Security          This link opens the Kaspersky Security Network Statement window, where you can read the text of the Kaspersky
  Network                     Security Network Statement.
  Statement




Kaspersky Security Network Statement
In this window, you can read the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement and accept its terms and
conditions.

Kaspersky Security Network settings

                             Setting                                                                     Description

  I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and              By selecting this option, you confirm that you want to use the Kaspersky Security
  accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky               Network, and you have fully read, understood, and accept the terms and conditions of
  Security Network Statement                                     the Kaspersky Security Network Statement that is displayed.
                                                                 This option is available if you selected the Basic KSN mode or Extended KSN mode
                                                                 option in the Kaspersky Security Network settings window.

  I do not accept the terms and conditions of the                By selecting this option, you confirm that you do not want to use Kaspersky Security
  Kaspersky Security Network Statement                           Network.
                                                                 This option is available if you selected the Basic KSN mode or Extended KSN mode
                                                                 option in the Kaspersky Security Network settings window.




                                                                            428
Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement
In this window, you can read the text of the Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement and accept its terms
and conditions.

Kaspersky Security Network settings

                        Setting                                                              Description

  I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and   By selecting this option, you confirm that you want to participate in the Kaspersky
  accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky    Security Network, and you have fully read, understood, and accept the terms and
  Security Network Statement                          conditions of the Kaspersky Private Security Network Statement that is displayed.

  I do not accept the terms and conditions of the     By selecting this option, you confirm that you do not want to use Kaspersky Security
  Kaspersky Security Network Statement                Network.




Configuring the use of Kaspersky Security Network in
the command line
You can enable or disable the use of Kaspersky Security Network in the command line by using the UseKSN option
in the general application settings.

You can change the value of UseKSN with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that contains all
general application settings.

To enable the use of Kaspersky Security Network with the help of command line switches, run:

   kesl-control --set-app-settings UseKSN=<Extended/Basic> --accept-ksn


  where:


    <Extended/Basic>: Kaspersky Security Network mode.

    --accept-ksn: an option signifying that you agree to the terms in the Kaspersky Security Network Statement.
    You confirm that you have fully read, understand, and accept the terms and conditions of the Kaspersky
    Security Network Statement.

The file ksn_license.<language ID> containing the text of the Kaspersky Security Network Statement is located in
the directory /opt/kaspersky/kesl/doc/.

To disable the use of Kaspersky Security Network with the help of command line switches, run:

   kesl-control --set-app-settings UseKSN=No


To enable or disable use of Kaspersky Security Network with a configuration file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-app-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json] [--accept-
  ksn]




                                                                  429
  where:


   --file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file with the general application
   settings where the required UseKSN value is configured.

   Specify the --json option if you are importing settings from a JSON configuration file. If the --json option is
   not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.

   --accept-ksn: an option signifying that you agree to the terms in the Kaspersky Security Network Statement.
   You must specify the option if you are enabling the use of Kaspersky Security Network.

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security installed on a client device runs under a Kaspersky Security Center policy, the value
of the UseKSN setting can only be modified by using Kaspersky Security Center. When Kaspersky Endpoint
Security installed on a client device stops running under a policy, the following value is assigned to the setting:
UseKSN=No.



Checking the connection to Kaspersky Security Network using
the command line
To check the connection to Kaspersky Security Network, run the following command:

  kesl-control --app-info


The Using Kaspersky Security Network line displays the status of the connection to Kaspersky Security Network:

   If Extended KSN mode is displayed, Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses Kaspersky Security Network,
   information can be obtained from the knowledge base, and anonymous statistics and information about the
   types and sources of threats are sent.

   If Basic KSN mode is displayed, Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses Kaspersky Security Network and
   information can be obtained from the knowledge base, but anonymous statistics and information about the
   types and sources of threats are not sent.

   If the status is Disabled, Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not use Kaspersky Security Network.

The Kaspersky Security Network Infrastructure line displays information about the infrastructure solution that is
used to work with Kaspersky reputation databases: Kaspersky Security Network or Kaspersky Private
Security Network.

A connection to Kaspersky Security Network may be absent for the following reasons:

   The user device is not connected to the internet.

   The use of Kaspersky Security Network is disabled.

   The application has not been activated or the license has expired.

   Problems related to the license key are detected. For example, the key is in the denylist.




                                                        430
Enabling and disabling cloud mode from the command line
Cloud mode is an operating mode of Kaspersky Endpoint Security that uses a lightweight version of the malware
databases.


  Lightweight anti-malware databases are not supported if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running in Light
  Agent mode for protecting virtual environments. The application receives special databases required for Light
  Agent operation from Protection Server.


You can enable or disable cloud mode in the command line with the help of the CloudMode=Yes/No option in the
general application settings.

You can change the value of CloudMode using a configuration file that contains all general application settings or
with command line options.


  Cloud mode is available if use of Kaspersky Security Network is enabled.




                                                       431
Advanced application settings
You can configure the following additional application settings:

   Using a proxy server in the application.

   Global exclusions – exclude mount points from file operation interception for the File Threat Protection, Anti-
   Cryptor, and Container Monitoring components and the Critical Areas Scan, Container Scan, and Removable
   Drives Scan tasks.

   Exclude process memory from scans.

   File operations interception mode.

   Detection of legitimate applications that threat intruders can use to compromise devices or data.

   Application stability monitoring.

   Application startup settings.

   Limit on the use of memory and processor resources for scan tasks.

   Limit on the use of resident memory by the application.

   Limit on the number of Custom Scan tasks that a non-privileged user can start simultaneously.

   Settings for the transfer of data to the Kaspersky Security Center storage.

   Task management permissions.




Configuring a proxy server
You can configure proxy server settings if the users of the client devices use a proxy server to connect to the
internet. The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application can use a proxy server to connect to Kaspersky activation
servers, to update sources for databases and application modules, to Kaspersky Security Network, and when
verifying website certificates using the Web Threat Protection component.

The proxy server is not used by default.

If you use an activation code to activate devices in an isolated network segment without internet access, you can
use Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server as a proxy server for access to Kaspersky activation servers.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the use of a proxy
  server for connecting to Kaspersky Security Network, the SVM, and the Integration Server is not supported.
  Using the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server as a proxy server for accessing Kaspersky
  activation servers is also not supported.




                                                        432
Configuring proxy server settings in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure use of a proxy server in the policy properties (Application settings →
General settings → Proxy server settings).

Proxy server settings

                Setting                                                                   Description

   Do not use proxy server             If this option is selected, the application does not use a proxy server.

   Use the specified proxy server      If you select this option the application uses the specified proxy server settings to connect to Kaspersky
   settings                            activation servers, to update sources for databases and application modules, to Kaspersky Security
                                       Network, and when verifying website certificates using the Web Threat Protection component.

   Address                             Field for entering the proxy server's IP address or domain name.
                                       This field is available if the Use the specified proxy server settings option is selected.

   Port                                Field for entering the proxy server's port.
                                       Default value: 3128.
                                       This field is available if the Use the specified proxy server settings option is selected.

   Use proxy server authentication     Enables or disables proxy server authentication using a user name and password.
                                       This check box is available if the Use the specified proxy server settings option is selected.
                                       This check box is cleared by default.


                                          When connecting via an HTTP proxy, we recommend to use a separate account that is not used to
                                          sign in to other systems. An HTTP proxy uses an insecure connection, and the account may be
                                          compromised.




   User name                           Entry field for the user name used for proxy server authentication.
                                       The entry field is available if the Use proxy server authentication check box is selected.

   Edit                                Allows you to specify a password for authenticating on the proxy server. The Password field cannot be
                                       edited. By default, the password is empty.
                                       To specify a password, click Edit. In the window that opens, enter the password and click OK.


                                          It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms
                                          ensure that the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.



                                       Clicking the Show button in the window displays the password in clear text in the password entry window.
                                       The button is available if the Use proxy server authentication check box is selected.

   Use Kaspersky Security Center       Enables or disables the use of Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server as a proxy server for
   as a proxy server for application   accessing Kaspersky activation servers. This is necessary when activating the application in an isolated
   activation                          network segment without internet access using an activation code.
                                       If this check box is selected, the application gains access to activation servers via the Administration Server
                                       that has internet access.
                                       This check box is cleared by default.


                                          This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode. If the application is used in Light
                                          Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the license information is provided by the Protection
                                          Server.




                                                                      433
Configuring proxy server settings in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure the use of a proxy server in the policy properties (General
settings → Proxy server settings).

Proxy server settings

                Setting                                                                   Description

   Do not use proxy server             If this option is selected, the application does not use a proxy server.

   Use the specified proxy server      If you select this option the application uses the specified proxy server settings to connect to Kaspersky
   settings                            activation servers, to update sources for databases and application modules, to Kaspersky Security
                                       Network, and when verifying website certificates using the Web Threat Protection component.

   Address and port                    Fields for entering the proxy server's IP address or domain name as well as its port.
                                       Default port: 3128.
                                       These fields are available if the Use the specified proxy server settings option is selected.

   Use proxy server authentication     This check box enables or disables proxy server authentication using a user name and password.
                                       This check box is available if the Use the specified proxy server settings option is selected.
                                       This check box is cleared by default.


                                          When connecting via an HTTP proxy, we recommend to use a separate account that is not used to
                                          sign in to other systems. An HTTP proxy uses an insecure connection, and the account may be
                                          compromised.




   User name                           Entry field for the user name used for proxy server authentication.
                                       The entry field is available if the Use proxy server authentication check box is selected.

   Password                            Entry field for entering the user password for proxy server authentication.


                                          It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms
                                          ensure that the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.



                                       Clicking the Show button causes the user's password to be displayed in clear text in the Password field. By
                                       default, the user password is hidden and is displayed as asterisks.
                                       The text box and the button are available if the Use proxy server authentication check box is selected.

   Use Kaspersky Security Center       Enables or disables the use of Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server as a proxy server for
   as a proxy server for application   accessing Kaspersky activation servers. This is necessary when activating the application in an isolated
   activation                          network segment without internet access using an activation code.
                                       If this check box is selected, the application gains access to activation servers via the Administration Server
                                       that has internet access.
                                       This check box is cleared by default.


                                          This setting applies only if the application is used in standard mode. If the application is used in Light
                                          Agent mode to protect virtual environments, the license information is provided by the Protection
                                          Server.




Configuring proxy server settings in the command line
You can enable or disable the use of a proxy server by application components in the command line with the help
of the UseProxy and ProxyServer settings in the general application settings.


                                                                      434
You can change the values of the settings with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that
contains all general application settings.

The UseProxy setting can take the following values:

   Yes - enable the use of a proxy server.

   No: disable the proxy server.

The ProxyServer setting lets you specify proxy server settings in the following format: < connection
protocol >://[< user >[:< password >]@]< proxy server address >[:< port >], where:

   < user > is a user name for proxy server authentication.

   < password > is a user password for proxy server authentication.

   < proxy server address > is the IP address or domain name of the proxy server.

   < port > is the port number of the proxy server.


  Connecting to a proxy server over HTTPS is not supported.



  When connecting via an HTTP proxy, we recommend to use a separate account that is not used to sign in to
  other systems. An HTTP proxy uses an insecure connection, and the account may be compromised.




Configuring global exclusions
You can configure exclusion of mount points from file operation interception for the File Threat Protection and
Anti-Cryptor components, as well as from scanning by the Malware Scan, Critical Areas Scan, and Container Scan
tasks. Exclusion of mount points allows you to exclude local or remote directories mounted on a device from
interception of file operations. In addition, global exclusions affect the operation of the Container Monitoring
component and the Removable Drives Scan task.




Configuring global exclusions in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure use of global exclusions in the policy properties (Application settings →
General settings → Global exclusions).

The table in the Global exclusions section contains mount points to be excluded from file operation interception.

The Path column displays the paths to the excluded mount points. The table is empty by default.

You can add, edit, and delete items in the table.


  Clicking the Delete button removes the selected item from the table.


                                                       435
  This button is available if at least one item is selected in the table.




Adding a mount point exclusion window
Mount point settings

           Setting                                                                     Description

  File system, access       In this drop-down list, you can select the type of file system where the directories that you want to add to scan
  protocol, and path        exclusions are located:
                                Local: local mount points.
                                Mounted: remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba or NFS protocol.
                                All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

  Access protocol           You can select the remote access protocol in the drop-down list:
                                NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                                Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                                Custom – resources of the device's file system specified in the field below.
                            This drop-down list is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

  Path                      Field for entering the path to the mount point that you want to exclude from file operation interception. You can use
                            masks to specify the path.

                              You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                              You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the / character
                              in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                              You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                              character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                              The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                              To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                              The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                              mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                              You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.




                               Mount points must be specified in the same way as they are displayed in the mount command output.



                            This field is available if the Local type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems.

  Name of shared resource   The field for entering the name of the file system shared resource, where the directories that you want to add to the
                            file operation interception exclusions are located.
                            The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the File system drop-down list and the Custom item is
                            selected in the Access protocol drop-down list.




Configuring global exclusions in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure use of global exclusions in the policy properties (General settings
→ Global exclusions).

The Excluded mount points group of settings contains a Configure button. Clicking this button opens the
Excluded mount points window.

The list in the window contains the paths to the excluded mount points. By default, the list is empty. You can add,
edit, and delete items in the list.



                                                                       436
Mount point path window
Mount point settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  File system, access    The settings block lets you set the location of the mount point.
  protocol, and path     In the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the type of file system where the directories that you want to add
                         to scan exclusions are located:
                             Local: local mount points.
                             Mounted: remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba or NFS protocol.
                             All remote mounted – all remote directories mounted on the device using the Samba and NFS protocols.

                          If Mounted is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, you can select the remote access protocol in the drop-
                          down list on the right:
                              NFS: remote directories mounted on a device using the NFS protocol.
                              Samba: remote directories mounted on a device using the Samba protocol.
                              Custom: all the resources of the device file system specified in the field below.

                          If Local is selected in the drop-down list of file systems, then in the input field you can enter a path to a mount point
                          that you want to exclude from file operation interception. You can use masks to specify the path.

                            You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

                            You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                            character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                            You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                            character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                            The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                            To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                            The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask excludes all
                            mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

                            You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.




                             Mount points must be specified in the same way as they are displayed in the mount command output.




  Filesystem name        The field for entering the name of the file system where the directories that you to exclude from file operation
                         interception are located.
                         The field is available if the Mounted type is selected in the drop-down list of file systems and the Custom item is
                         selected in the drop-down list on the right.




Configuring global exclusions in the command line
You can define mount point exclusions in the command line via the ExcludedMountPoint.item_# option in the
general application settings.

You can edit the setting using command line options or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.




                                                                     437
The ExcludedMountPoint.item_# option accepts the following values:

   AllRemoteMounted — Exclude all remote directories mounted on the device using SMB and NFS protocols
   from file operation interception.

   Mounted:NFS — Exclude all remote directories mounted on the device using the NFS protocol from file
   operation interception.

   Mounted:SMB — Exclude all remote directories mounted on the device using the SMB protocol from file
   operation interception.

   Mounted:< file system type > — Exclude all mounted directories with the specified file system type from
   file operation interception.

   /mnt — Exclude objects in the /mnt mount point (including subdirectories) from file operation interception. This
   directory is used as the temporary mount point for removable drives.

   < path that contains the /mnt/user* or /mnt/**/user_share> — Exclude objects in mount points
   whose names contain the specified mask from file operation interception.

     You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

     You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
     the / character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file.

     You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set
     and the / character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/.

     The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect
     mask.

     To exclude the mount point /dir, you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

     The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/**
     mask excludes all mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

     You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.



  Mount points must be specified in the same way as they are displayed in the mount command output.


You can specify several mount points to exclude from scanning.




Exclude process memory from scans
You can exclude process memory from scans. The application does not scan the memory of the specified
processes.




                                                       438
Configuring exclusions in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can configure excluding process memory from scans in the policy properties (Application
settings → General settings → Application settings).

Clicking Configure exclusion of process memory from scans under Exclude process memory from scans opens
the Exclude process memory from scans window, where you can create a list of exclusions.

The list in the Exclude process memory from scans window contains the paths to processes that the application
excludes from process memory scanning. You can use masks to specify the path. By default, the list is empty.


  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

  You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
  the / character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file.

  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
  the / character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/.

  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

  To exclude the mount point /dir, you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

  The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask
  excludes all mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

  You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the list.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected process path from
  the list.

  This button is available if at least one process path is selected in the list.



  The Edit button a window where you can change the process path. Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes the
  memory of the indicated process from scans.



  The Add button opens a window where you can enter the full path to a process. Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  excludes the memory of the indicated process from scans.



Configuring exclusions in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure excluding process memory from scans in the policy properties
(General settings → Excluding process memory).

Clicking Configure under Exclude process memory from scans opens a window where you can create a list of
exclusions.


                                                           439
The list in the Exclude process memory from scans window contains the paths to processes that the application
excludes from process memory scanning. You can use masks to specify the path. By default, the list is empty.


  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

  You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
  the / character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file.

  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
  the / character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/.

  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

  To exclude the mount point /dir, you need to specifically indicate /dir (no asterisk).

  The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask
  excludes all mount points below the level of /dir but not /dir itself.

  You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.


You can add, edit, and delete items in the list.


  Clicking the Delete button causes Kaspersky Endpoint Security to remove the selected process path from
  the list.

  This button is available if at least one process path is selected in the list.



  The Edit button a window where you can change the process path. Kaspersky Endpoint Security excludes the
  memory of the indicated process from scans.



  The Add button opens a window where you can enter the full path to a process. Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  excludes the memory of the indicated process from scans.



Configuring exclusions on the command line

You can configure excluding process memory from scans in the command line using the
MemScanExcludedProgramPath.item_# option in the general application settings.

You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

MemScanExcludedProgramPath.item_# contains the full path to the process in the local directory. You can use
masks to specify the path.


  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

  You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
  the / character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file.

                                                           440
  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
  the / character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/.

  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

  You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.


You can specify several processes to exclude from scanning.




Selecting the interception mode for file operations
The file operation interception mode affects the File Threat Protection and Device Control components.

   For the duration of the scan, the application can block access to files that are being scanned by the File Threat
   Protection component. By default, access is blocked: any access to the scanned file must wait until the scan
   results are in. If the scan detects no threats in the file, the application allows access to the file. When detecting
   infected objects, the application takes the actions specified in the First action (FirstAction) and Second
   action (SecondAction) settings for File Threat Protection.
   You can choose not to block access to files that are being scanned by the File Threat Protection component. In
   that case, the scan is performed asynchronously.

   The application can block access to files on the device while the Device Control component is deciding if
   access to the device can be granted. By default, access is blocked: any access to files on the managed device
   must wait until the scan results are in. The application allows access to files if after the scan, Device Control
   allows access to the device that contains the files.
   You can disable file access blocking on the device monitored by the Device Control component. In that case,
   Device Control determines if access to the device can be allowed in asynchronous mode.


Configuring in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can configure the file operation interception mode in the policy properties (Application
settings → General settings → Application settings, File operations interception mode section).

The Block access to files during scans check box enables or disables the blocking of access to files while they are
being scanned by the File Threat Protection and Device Control components.

The check box is selected by default.

If the check box is cleared, access to any file is allowed for the duration of the scan, and the scan runs in
asynchronous mode.


Configuring in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure the file operation interception mode in the policy properties
(General settings → Application settings, File operations interception mode section).

The Block access to files during scans check box enables or disables the blocking of access to files while they are
being scanned by the File Threat Protection and Device Control components.

The check box is selected by default.
                                                         441
If the check box is cleared, access to any file is allowed for the duration of the scan, and the scan runs in
asynchronous mode.


Configuring in the command line

You can configure the file operation interception mode in the command line using the FileBlockDuringScan
setting in the general application settings.

You can edit the setting using command line options or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

The FileBlockDuringScan option accepts the following values:

   Yes (default value) to block access to files for the duration of the scan by the File Threat Protection and
   Device Control components.

   No to allow access to files during the scan. Requests to any file is allowed, scanning is done asynchronously.


     This file operation interception mode has less impact on the system performance, but there is a risk that a
     threat in a file will not be disinfected or deleted if the file can, for example, change its name during a scan
     before the application makes a decision on the status of the file.




Configuring detection of applications that hackers can
use to harm
You can enable or disable detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or
data.


Configuring in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or
data in the policy properties (Application settings → General settings → Application settings, Scan settings
section).

The Detect legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or data check box enables or
disables detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise the device or data of the user.

This check box is cleared by default.


Configuring in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise
devices or data in the policy properties (General settings → Application settings, Scan settings section).

The Detect legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or data check box enables or
disables detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise the device or data of the user.


                                                         442
This check box is cleared by default.


Configuring in the command line

In the command line, you can enable or disable detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to
compromise devices or data by using the DetectOtherObjects setting in the general application settings.

You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

DetectOtherObjects accepts the following values:

   Yes: enable detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or data.

   No: do not enable detection of legitimate applications that intruders can use to compromise devices or data.




Enabling application stability monitoring
You can enable or disable the Kaspersky Endpoint Security stability monitoring that lets you track the number of
times the application terminates abnormally and notify the administrator about the unstable operation of the
application.


Configuring in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can enable or disable application stability monitoring in the policy properties (Application
settings → General settings → Application settings, Advanced application settings section).

The Enable application stability monitoring check box enables or disables monitoring of the state of the
Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.

This check box is cleared by default.


  To apply the setting, you must restart the application.


If the application is unstable, the following message is displayed in the properties of the device with the installed
application: <Number> abnormal halts of the application since <date and time>.


Configuring in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can enable or disable application stability monitoring in the policy properties
(General settings → Application settings, Advanced application settings section).

The Enable application stability monitoring check box enables or disables monitoring of the state of the
Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.




                                                         443
This check box is cleared by default.


  To apply the setting, you must restart the application.


If the application is unstable, the following message is displayed in the properties of the device with the installed
application: <Number> abnormal halts of the application since <date and time>.


Configuring in the command line

On the command line, you can configure application stability monitoring using the TrackProductCrashes,
ProductHealthLogFile, WarnThreshold, WarnAfter_#_crash and WarnRemovingThreshold settings in the
kesl.ini configuration file.

The TrackProductCrashes setting lets you enable or disable application stability monitoring. This setting can
take the following values:

   Yes/true – enable application stability monitoring.

   No/false – do not enable application stability monitoring.

The ProductHealthLogFile setting lets you specify the path to a file used for application stability monitoring.
Default value: /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/kesl_health.log.

The WarnThreshold setting lets you set the time interval (in seconds) in which the application must experience
the specified number of abnormal halts before displaying a notification about unstable operation. Default value:
3600 seconds.

The WarnRemovingThreshold setting lets you set the time interval (in seconds) after which the application's
unstable status will be cleared. Default value: 86400 seconds.

The WarnAfter_#_crash setting lets you set the number of abnormal halts of the application that are required
before displaying a notification about unstable application operation. The setting can take values from 0 to 10.
Default value: 10. If the value is 0, an unstable application notification is not displayed.




Configuring application startup settings
You can configure the application startup settings.


Setting a limit in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can configure the application startup settings in the policy properties (Application
settings → General settings → Application settings, Application startup settings section).




                                                         444
Application startup settings

                         Setting                                                               Description

   Maximum consecutive unsuccessful attempts to       The input field for the maximum number of consecutive unsuccessful attempts to start
   start the application                              the application.
                                                      Default value: 5.

   Maximum time to wait for application start (min)   The input field for the maximum time to wait for the application to start (in minutes), after
                                                      which the kesl process will be restarted.
                                                      Default value: 3.




Setting a limit in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure the application startup settings in the policy properties (General
settings → Application settings, Application startup settings section).

Under Application startup settings, clicking the Configure button opens the Application startup settings
window, in which you can edit the application startup settings (see the table below).

Application startup settings

                         Setting                                                               Description

   Maximum consecutive unsuccessful attempts to       The input field for the maximum number of consecutive unsuccessful attempts to start
   start the application                              the application.
                                                      Default value: 5.

   Maximum time to wait for application start (min)   The input field for the maximum time to wait for the application to start (in minutes), after
                                                      which the kesl process will be restarted.
                                                      Default value: 3.




Setting a limit on the command line

In the command line, you can configure application startup settings using the MaxRestartCount and
StartupTimeout settings in the kesl.ini configuration file.

The MaxRestartCount setting lets you set the maximum number of unsuccessful consecutive attempts to start
the application. The setting can take values from 1 to 10. Default value: 5.

The StartupTimeout setting lets you set the maximum time to wait for the application to start (in minutes), after
which the kesl process will be restarted. The setting can take values from 1 to 60. Default value: 3.




Limiting the use of resident memory by the application
You can configure a limit on the application's use of resident memory. By default, the limit is set automatically.


Setting a limit in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can enable or disable the resident memory usage limit in the policy properties
(Application settings → General settings → Application settings, Advanced application settings section).

In the Advanced application settings section, the Configure memory usage link opens a window where you can
configure the resident memory usage limit (see the table below).


                                                                   445
Settings

              Setting                                                                   Description

  Resident memory usage by         In the drop-down list, you can select how to limit resident memory usage:
  the application                      Unlimited. When this item is selected, resident memory usage is not limited.
                                       Limited to a percentage of total. When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (%) field becomes
                                       available, in which you can specify the necessary value as a percentage.
                                       Limited to a value in MB. When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (MB) field becomes available, in
                                       which you can specify the desired value in megabytes.
                                       Limited to whichever is lowest (%, MB). When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (%) and Memory
                                       usage limit (MB) fields become available, in which you can specify the necessary values.
                                       Limited to whichever is highest (%, MB). When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (%) and
                                       Memory usage limit (MB) fields become available, in which you can specify the necessary values.
                                       Limited automatically (recommended). When this item is selected, resident memory usage is limited
                                       automatically (default value).

  Memory usage limit (%)           Input field for the memory usage limit (as a percentage).
                                   Default value: 50.

  Memory usage limit (MB)          Input field for the memory usage limit (in megabytes).
                                   Default value: 2000.




Setting a limit in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure the resident memory usage limit in the policy properties (General
settings → Application settings).

In the Advanced application settings section, clicking the Configure button opens the Additional settings
window, in which you can configure the resident memory usage limit (see the table below).

Settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  Application              In the drop-down list, you can select how to limit resident memory usage:
  memory usage
                               Unlimited. When this item is selected, resident memory usage is not limited.
                               Limited automatically (recommended). When this item is selected, resident memory usage is limited automatically
                               (default value).
                               Limited to a percentage of total. When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (%) field becomes available, in
                               which you can specify the necessary value as a percentage.
                               Limited to a value in MB. When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (MB) field becomes available, in which
                               you can specify the desired value in megabytes.
                               Limited to whichever is lowest (%, MB). When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (%) and Memory usage
                               limit (MB) fields become available, in which you can specify the necessary values.
                               Limited to whichever is highest (%, MB). When this item is selected, the Memory usage limit (%) and Memory usage
                               limit (MB) fields become available, in which you can specify the necessary values.

  Memory usage limit       Input field for the memory usage limit (as a percentage).
  (%)                      Default value: 50.

  Memory usage limit       Input field for the memory usage limit (in megabytes).
  (MB)                     Default value: 2000.




Setting a limit on the command line

In the command line, you can configure the resident memory usage limit using the MaxMemory setting in the kesl.ini
configuration file.

The MaxMemory setting can take the following values:

    off – the resident set size is not limited.

    < value >% – a value between 1 and 100, expressing a percentage of memory.

                                                                        446
    < value >MB – a value in megabytes.

    lowest/< value >%/< value >MB – the smaller value between the value as a percentage and the value in
    megabytes.

    highest/< value >%/< value >MB – the larger value between the value as a percentage and the value in
    megabytes.

    auto – up to 50% of available memory, but not less than 2 GB and not more than 16 GB.

Default value: auto.




Limiting the use of memory and processor resources
You can configure memory usage limits for scan tasks. The default limit is 8192 megabytes.


  We recommend specifying a memory usage limit for scan tasks below the resident memory usage limit to
  avoid using up all available memory for scan tasks and causing the application to restart.


You can set a limit on CPU usage for scan tasks. No limit is set by default. When configuring the limit, we
recommended keeping in mind that resource of all CPU cores combined is taken as 100%. In the output of the top
utility, 100% corresponds to the full utilization of a single core. Thus, for a 10-core CPU (reported by the top utility
as 1000% total), a value of 400% means that the usage of the entire CPU (all cores taken together) is 40%. If you
want the value reported by the top utility to be kept below 150% on the same 10-core CPU, you need to specify
15 as the CPU usage limit. The CPU usage limit must be an integer from 10 to 100. Moreover, the CPU usage limit is
not applied to all application tasks, but only to the Malware Scan, Critical Areas Scan, Inventory, and Container
Scan tasks, which means that the CPU usage may exceed the configured value.


Setting a limit in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can enable and disable the CPU utilization limit and configure the memory usage limit for
scan tasks in the policy properties (Application settings → General settings → Application settings,
Performance section).

Settings

           Setting                                                               Description

  Memory usage limit for    Input field for the memory usage limit for scan tasks (in megabytes).
  scan tasks (MB)
                            Default value: 8192.

  Limit CPU usage by scan   This check box enables or disables the CPU utilization limit for the Malware Scan, Critical Areas Scan, Inventory, and
  tasks (%)                 Container Scan tasks.
                            If the check box is selected, the maximum utilization of all processor cores will not exceed the number specified in
                            Upper limit (%). The value in the field must be an integer from 10 to 100.
                            This check box is cleared by default.




Setting a limit in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can enable and disable the CPU utilization limit and configure the memory usage
limit for scan tasks in the policy properties (General settings → Application settings, Performance section).


                                                                    447
Clicking Configure under Performance opens the Performance settings for scan tasks window, in which you can
configure limits in the CPU and memory usage section (see table below).

Settings

           Setting                                                               Description

  Limit CPU usage by scan   This check box enables or disables the CPU utilization limit for the Malware Scan, Critical Areas Scan, Inventory, and
  tasks (%)                 Container Scan tasks.
                            If the check box is selected, the maximum utilization of all processor cores will not exceed the percentage specified
                            in the field on the right. The value in the field must be an integer from 10 to 100.
                            This check box is cleared by default.

  Memory usage limit for    Input field for the memory usage limit for scan tasks (in megabytes).
  scan tasks (MB)           Default value: 8192.




Setting a limit on the command line

In the command line, you can configure CPU utilization limits for ODS, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan tasks
using the UseOnDemandCPULimit and OnDemandCPULimit settings in the general application settings.

You can change the values of the settings with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that
contains all general application settings.

UseOnDemandCPULimit accepts the following values:

    Yes: enable the CPU usage limit for tasks of the ODS, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan types.

    No: disable the CPU usage limit for tasks.

The OnDemandCPULimit option sets the maximum utilization level for all processor cores (as a percentage) when
running ODS, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan tasks. The value of the setting must be an integer from 10 to 100.
Default value 100.

In the command line, you can configure memory usage limits for ODS, ContainerScan, and InventoryScan tasks
using the ScanMemoryLimit setting in the kesl.ini configuration file. Default value: 8192.




Limiting the number of Custom Scan tasks
You can set a limit on the number of custom scan tasks that a non-privileged user can simultaneously run on a
device. There is no limit on the number of tasks that a user with root privileges can run.


Setting a limit in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can limit the number of custom scan tasks that an unprivileged user can simultaneously
run on the device in the policy properties (Application settings → General settings → Application settings,
Performance section).

Clicking the Configure the maximum number of custom scan tasks link in the Performance section opens a
window in which you can specify a value between 0 and 100,000 in the Maximum number of custom scan tasks
field. Default value: 0. If 0 is specified, a non-privileged user cannot start custom scan tasks.




                                                                    448
Setting a limit in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can limit the number of custom scan tasks that an unprivileged user can
simultaneously run on the device in the policy properties (General settings → Application settings, Performance
section).

Clicking the Configure button in the Performance section opens the Performance settings for scan tasks
window, in which you can specify a value from 0 to 100,000 in the Number of custom scan tasks section,
Maximum number of custom scan tasks field. Default value: 0. If 0 is specified, a non-privileged user cannot start
custom scan tasks.


Setting a limit on the command line

You can configure the limit on the number of concurrent custom scan tasks on the command line using the
LimitNumberOfScanFileTasks setting in the general application settings.

You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

LimitNumberOfScanFileTasks accepts values from 0 to 100000. If 0 is specified, a non-privileged user cannot
start custom scan tasks. Default value: 5.




Configuring the transfer of data to Kaspersky Security
Center storage
In Kaspersky Security Center, you can enable or disable the transfer of data about files in Backup, quarantined files,
unprocessed files, and connected devices to the Kaspersky Security Center storage.

The general list of files quarantined by Kaspersky applications on client devices is kept in Kaspersky Security
Center and is available in the Web Console (Operations → Repositories → Quarantine) and the Administration
Console (Advanced → Repositories → Quarantine).

A general list of files placed in Backup by Kaspersky applications on client devices is kept in Kaspersky Security
Center and is available in the Web Console (Advanced → Repositories → Backup) and in the Web Console
(Operations → Repositories → Backup).

Information about unprocessed files is displayed in the list of active threats in the Web Console (Operations →
Storages → Active threats) and in the Administration Console (Advanced → Storages → Active threats).

Information about devices installed on or connected to a client device is displayed in the list of hardware in the
Web Console (Operations → Storages → Hardware) and in the Administration Console (Advanced → Storages
→ Hardware). Data is transferred if Device Control is enabled.


Enabling or disabling the transfer of data in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can enable or disable the transfer of data to the Administration Server in the policy
properties (Application settings → General settings → Storage settings, the Settings for transferring data to
the Administration Server section).



                                                        449
Settings for the transfer of data to the Kaspersky Security Center storage

             Setting                                                                   Description

   Inform about files in           This check box enables or disables the transfer of data about quarantined files to the Administration Server.
   Quarantine                      The check box is selected by default.

   Inform about files in           This check box enables or disables the transfer of data about files in Backup to the Administration Server.
   Backup
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Inform about unprocessed        This check box enables or disables sending notifications about the files, which cannot be processed during the
   files                           scan, to the Administration Server.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Inform about installed          This check box enables or disables the transfer of data about devices installed on a client device or connected to
   devices                         it, to the Administration Server.
                                   The check box is selected by default.




Enabling and disabling the transfer of data in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can enable or disable the transfer of data to the Administration Server in the
policy properties (General settings → Storage settings, the Transfer data to the Administration Server
section).

Clicking Configure in the Transfer data to the Administration Server section opens the Data transfer settings,
in which you can enable or disable the transfer of data to the Administration Server.

Settings for the transfer of data to the Kaspersky Security Center storage

             Setting                                                                   Description

   Inform about files in           This check box enables or disables the transfer of data about quarantined files to the Administration Server.
   Quarantine                      The check box is selected by default.

   Inform about files in           This check box enables or disables the transfer of data about files in Backup to the Administration Server.
   Backup
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Inform about unprocessed        This check box enables or disables sending notifications about the files, which cannot be processed during the
   files                           scan, to the Administration Server.
                                   The check box is selected by default.

   Inform about installed          This check box enables or disables the transfer of data about devices installed on a client device or connected to
   devices                         it, to the Administration Server.
                                   The check box is selected by default.




Configuring permissions for task management
You can define the following user permissions in Kaspersky Security Center:

    Using local tasks created in Kaspersky Endpoint Security. If the Kaspersky Security Center policy prohibits
    users from viewing and editing local tasks, information about the Scan_My_Computer, Critical_Areas_Scan,
    Container_Scan, Inventory_Scan, Update (in Standard mode) and Rollback (in Standard mode) tasks is not
    available.

    Viewing and managing tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center on client devices.




                                                                           450
Configuring in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can set the permission to view and manage tasks in the policy properties (Application
settings → Local Tasks → Task management).

Task management settings

                Setting                                                                Description

  Allow users to view and manage local   This check box allows or blocks the users from viewing local tasks created in Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  tasks                                  and control of these tasks on the managed client devices.
                                         This check box is cleared by default.

  Allow viewing and managing tasks       The check box allows or prohibits the users from viewing tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center
  created through KSC                    Web Console and managing these tasks on managed client devices.
                                         This check box is cleared by default.




Configuring in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can set the permission to view and manage tasks in the policy properties (Local
Tasks → Task management).

Task management settings

                Setting                                                                 Description

  Allow users to view and manage local   This check box allows or blocks the users from viewing local tasks created in Kaspersky Endpoint
  tasks                                  Security and control of these tasks on the managed client devices.
                                         This check box is cleared by default.

  Allow viewing and managing tasks       The check box allows or prohibits the users from viewing the tasks created in Kaspersky Security Center
  created through KSC                    and managing these tasks on the managed client devices.
                                         This check box is cleared by default.




                                                                    451
Backup
If Kaspersky Endpoint Security detects malicious code in a file while scanning a protected device, the application
can block the file, assign to it a status of Infected, place a copy in Backup, and attempt to disinfect the file.

Backup keeps copies of files that have been deleted or modified during disinfection. A backup copy is created
before disinfecting or deleting the file. Backup copies of files are stored in a special format and do not pose
a threat.

By default, the /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/objects-backup/ directory is used to store backup copies of
files. This directory also stores quarantined files. You can change the directory for storing Backup and Quarantine
objects using the command line.

Sometimes it is not possible to maintain the integrity of files during disinfection. If after disinfection, you partially
or completely lose access to important information in a disinfected file, you can try restoring the file from the
backup copy.


  Restoring infected objects may lead to a device infection.


Backup file copies may contain personal data. Root privileges are required to access Backup objects.

You can configure quarantine settings on a device using a policy in the Web Console, in the Administration Console
or using the command line. You can configure the following Backup settings:

   Storage time for objects in Backup. Objects are kept for 30 days by default.

   Maximum Backup size. Backup has an unlimited size by default.

   Path to the directory where Backup and Quarantine objects are stored (can only be configured on the
   command line).

When the specified retention period expires, or when the maximum Backup size is reached, the application
automatically deletes the oldest backup copies regardless of their status.

You can delete the backup copy of a restored or unrestored file manually.

A general list of files placed in Backup by Kaspersky applications on client devices is generated in Kaspersky
Security Center and is available in the Administration Console (Advanced → Repositories → Backup) and in the
Web Console (Operations → Repositories → Backup). You can view the properties of files in backup storage on
protected devices and delete files from it. Kaspersky Security Center does not copy files from Backup to the
Administration Server; all files are stored in the Backups on protected devices. File restore takes place on the
protected device.

To manage files in Backup in Kaspersky Security Center, you need to enable the transfer of data about files in
Backup to the Administration Server.




Configuring Backup settings in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Backup in the policy properties (Application settings → General
settings → Storage settings).

                                                           452
Backup settings
                  Setting                                                                 Description

  Store objects no longer than (days)    The entry field to specify the period for storing objects in the Backup storage.
                                         Available values: 0–10000. If the check box is cleared, the period for storing objects in Backup is unlimited.
                                         Default value: 30.

  Limit the size of Backup to (MB)       The entry field to specify the maximum size of the Backup storage (MB).
                                         Possible values: 1–999999. If the check box is cleared, the size of Backup is unlimited.
                                         This check box is cleared by default.




Configuring Backup settings in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure Backup in the policy properties (General settings → Storage
settings).

Backup settings

                  Setting                                                                 Description

  Store objects no longer than (days)    This check box enables or disables the storage period limit (in days) for the objects in the Backup storage.
                                         Available values: 0–10000. If 0 is specified, the period for storing objects in the Backup storage is unlimited.
                                         Default value: 30.

  Limit the size of Backup to (MB)       This check box enables or disables the maximum Backup storage size (in megabytes).
                                         Possible values: 1–999999. If the check box is cleared, the size of Backup is unlimited.
                                         This check box is cleared by default.




Configuring Backup settings in the command line
On the command line, you can configure Backup settings using the BackupDaysToLive, BackupSizeLimit and
QuarantineBackupFolder settings in the general application settings.

You can change the values of the settings with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that
contains all general application settings.

Backup settings

            Setting                                           Description                                                     Value

   BackupDaysToLive              Time period for storing objects in the Backup storage (in days).       0–10000
                                 After the specified time has elapsed, the application deletes the
                                                                                                        0–unlimited retention.
                                 oldest backup copies of files.
                                                                                                        Default value: 30.
                                 To remove the object retention limit, set 0.




                                                                       453
           Setting                                      Description                                                  Value

  BackupSizeLimit           Maximum Backup size in MB. When the maximum Backup storage           0–999999
                            size is reached, the application deletes the oldest backup copies    0–unlimited size.
                            of files.
                                                                                                 Default value: 0.
                            To remove the Backup size limit, set 0.

  QuarantineBackupFolder    Path to the directory in which the Backup and Quarantine objects     Default value:
                            are stored. You can specify a directory that is different from the   /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/objects-
                            default directory. You can use a directory on any device as the      backup/
                            directory for storing Backup and Quarantine objects.
                            It is not recommended to assign directories that are located
                            on remote devices, such as those mounted via the Samba and              Root privileges are required for access
                            NFS protocols.                                                          to the default directory.
                            If the specified directory does not exist or is unavailable, the
                            application uses the default directory.




Working with Backup objects in the command line
You can use the Backup management commands in the command line for the following actions on Backup objects:

   View Backup object details.

   Delete some or all objects from Backup.

   Restore objects from Backup.


  Restoring infected objects may lead to a device infection.



Viewing Backup object details

To view the details of the objects in Backup, run:

  kesl-control -B --query ["< filter conditions >"] [-n < number >] [--json]


  where:


   < filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison
   operator > '< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results. If you do not
   specify any filter conditions, the application will display the details of all objects in Backup.

   < number >: the number of the most recent objects to display. If you do not specify the -n switch, the last 30
   objects will be displayed. Specify 0 to show all objects.

   --json: output data in JSON format.

The ObjectId line displays the numeric identifier that the application assigned to the object when placing it in
Backup. This ID is used to perform actions on the object, such as restoring or removing the object from the Backup
storage.




                                                                   454
Restoring objects from Backup

To restore an object under its original name to its original location, execute the following command:

  kesl-control -B --restore < object ID >


  where < object ID > is the numeric identifier that the application assigned to the object when placing it in
  Backup.


To restore an object under a new name to a specified directory, execute the following command:

  kesl-control -B --restore < object ID > --file < path to file >


  where --file < file path > is the new name of the file and the path to the directory you want to save it to. If
  the specified directory does not exist, the application creates it.


Deleting objects from Backup

To remove selected objects from Backup, run:

  kesl-control -B --mass-remove --query "< filter conditions >"


  where < filter conditions > is one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison
  operator > '< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results.


  Examples:
  To remove an object with ID=15:

  kesl-control -B --mass-remove --query "ObjectId == '15'"

  To remove objects that contain "test" in their names or paths:

  kesl-control -B --mass-remove --query "FileName like '%test%'"


To remove all objects from Backup, run:

  kesl-control -B --mass-remove




                                                                   455
Integration with Detection and Response
solutions
Detection and Response solutions by Kaspersky are security systems designed to detect advanced threats and
attack signs at various levels of the organization's infrastructure. Detection and Response solutions provide
information about the detected threat and let you manage your response to detections.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security interoperates with the following Kaspersky solutions:

   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform, namely, its Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) and
   Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) and KATA Sandbox components. Integration with
   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform is provided by the following components of the Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security application:

      Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) (hereinafter also EDR (KATA)).

      Network Detection and Response (KATA) (hereinafter also NDR (KATA)).

      Sandbox.

   Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform.

   Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum. Integration is facilitated by a Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security component: Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum (EDR Optimum).

   Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response. Integration is facilitated by a Kaspersky Endpoint Security
   component: Managed Detection and Response (MDR).

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response and Kaspersky Anti
Targeted Attack Platform, a large number of events can be written to the systemd log. If you want to disable the
logging of audit events to the systemd log, disable the systemd-journald-audit socket and restart the operating
system.

To disable the systemd-journald-audit socket, run the following commands:

  systemctl stop systemd-journald-audit.socket


  systemctl disable systemd-journald-audit.socket


  systemctl mask systemd-journald-audit.socket


In the SintezM-Client operating system, the auditd service configuration is protected from modification by default,
that is, it is in enabled 2 mode. For correct operation of the Behavior Detection component when Kaspersky
Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response and Kaspersky Anti Targeted
Attack Platform solutions, change the auditd mode in the configuration files to enabled 1 (no configuration
blocking) and restart the operating system.




                                                       456
About response actions for commands of Detection and
Response solutions
When integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component and the Kaspersky
Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum solution, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can perform response actions
aimed at providing security functions.


  The settings of Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component response actions and
  Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum solution response actions are not the same.


Kaspersky Endpoint Security can perform the following response actions:

   Quarantine files.
   The action is performed using the Quarantine file task.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), this
   task is configured in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
   you can configure the Quarantine file task in the settings of the EDR Optimum component of the Kaspersky
   Endpoint Security application or on a device with Kaspersky Endpoint Security using quarantine management
   commands.

   Delete files from Quarantine.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
   action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
   the action is performed in Kaspersky Security Center or on a device with Kaspersky Endpoint Security using
   quarantine management commands.

   Restore files from Quarantine.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
   action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
   the action is performed in Kaspersky Security Center or on a device with Kaspersky Endpoint Security using
   quarantine management commands.

   Get files from Quarantine.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
   action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
   the action is performed in Kaspersky Security Center.

   Get files from devices.
   This action is performed using the Get file task. For example, you can configure the application to get an event
   log file generated by a third-party program.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
   action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.


                                                       457
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
you can configure the Receive file from device task in the settings of the EDR Optimum component of the
Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.

Delete files from devices.
This action is performed using the Delete file task.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
you can configure the Delete file from device task in the settings of the EDR Optimum component of the
Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.

Remotely run processes on devices.
This action is performed using the Run process task. For example, you can remotely run a utility that creates a
device configuration file, and then retrieve the created file using the Get file task.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
you can configure the Start process task in the settings of the EDR Optimum component of the Kaspersky
Endpoint Security application.

Remotely terminate processes on devices.
The action is performed using the Terminate process task. For example, you can remotely terminate an Internet
speed test utility that was launched using the "Run process" task.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
action is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
you can configure the Terminate process task in the settings of the EDR Optimum component of the Kaspersky
Endpoint Security application.

Detect Indicators of Compromise on devices and perform threat response actions.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
IOC scan is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
an IOC Scan is performed using the IOC Scan task. You can configure the IOC Scan task in the settings of the
EDR Optimum component of Kaspersky Endpoint Security or on the device running Kaspersky Endpoint
Security using the IOC Scan management commands.

Enable or disable network isolation of the device.
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), you
can:

   Disable network isolation on the command line.

   Enable or disable network isolation in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.




                                                       458
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
   you can:

      Enable or disable network isolation in the Web Console.

      Disable network isolation on the command line.

      Configure automatic disabling of network isolation in the Web Console.

   Configure execution prevention rules for objects.
   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), you
   can:

      Start and stop the application of object execution prevention rules from the command line.

      From the command line, view the list of object execution prevention rules received from the Kaspersky
      Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component.

   When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum,
   you can:

      Create and configure execution prevention rules for objects in the Web Console.

      Start and stop the application of object execution prevention rules in the Web Console or on the command
      line.

      From the command line, view the list of execution prevention rules received from Kaspersky Endpoint
      Detection and Response Optimum.




Integration with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform
Kaspersky Endpoint Security is compatible with the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, which is
designed to protect the IT infrastructure of organizations and promptly detect threats, such as zero-day attacks,
targeted attacks, and advanced persistent threats (APT). To read more, check out the Kaspersky Anti Targeted
Attack Platform Help .

The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application can integrate with the following components of the Kaspersky Anti
Targeted Attack Platform solution:

   Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) protects devices on the corporate LAN. When interacting
   with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), Kaspersky Endpoint Security can:

      Send data about events on devices (telemetry) to the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform server with
      the Central Node component ("KATA server"). Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends monitoring data on
      processes, open network connections, and modified files to the KATA server, as well as data on threats
      detected by the application and data on the results of processing these threats.

      Execute response actions to ensure security when receiving commands from Kaspersky Anti Targeted
      Attack Platform.




                                                       459
   Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) protects the internal enterprise network and sends data
   about events on devices (telemetry) to the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform server with the Central
   Node component (hereinafter also the NDR server).

   KATA Sandbox analyzes and scans objects to detect malicious activity and indicators of targeted attacks on
   the corporate IT infrastructure using special servers with deployed virtual images of operating systems
   (hereinafter also the Sandbox server).

Integration with these components of the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution is provided
by the following components of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application:

   Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) (hereinafter also EDR (KATA))

   Network Detection and Response (KATA) (hereinafter also NDR (KATA))

   Sandbox

You can configure the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with all components of the
Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, as well as with each component individually.


  To integrate with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform components, you need to activate the Kaspersky
  Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution (see the solution help for more details). There is no need to activate
  the Kaspersky Endpoint Security components that provide integration. The main licenses for Kaspersky
  Endpoint Security include this functionality.



  Integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform is
  possible only if the Behavior Detection component is enabled. Otherwise, the necessary telemetry is not
  transmitted (except for synchronization requests).


The Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component can additionally use data received from the
following components:

   File Threat Protection.

   Network Threat Protection.

   Web Threat Protection.

The Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) component can additionally use data received from the
following components:

   File Threat Protection.

   Network Threat Protection.

   Web Threat Protection.

   Anti-Cryptor.

   Application Control.




                                                      460
   Device Control.

   System Integrity Monitoring.

While integrated with the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution, devices running Kaspersky Endpoint
Security establish encrypted connections to the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server using the HTTPS protocol. To ensure
the security of the connection, the following certificates issued by the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server are used:

   KATA/NDR/Sandbox server certificate. The connection is encrypted using the server's TLS certificate. You can
   elevate the security of the connection by verifying the server certificate on the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
   side. To do this, you need to add the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server certificate before enabling integration with the
   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution.

   Client certificate. This certificate is used for additional connection protection using two-way authentication
   (i.e. the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server checks devices with the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application). The
   same client certificate can be used by multiple devices. By default, the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server does not
   check client certificates, but two-way authentication can be enabled on the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack
   Platform side. In this case, you need to enable two-way authentication in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
   Response (KATA), Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA), or KATA Sandbox integration settings
   and add the client certificate (cryptocontainer with certificate and private key).

Certificates for securing the connection to the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server are provided by the Kaspersky Anti
Targeted Attack Platform administrator.

A proxy server is used to connect to the KATA/NDR/Sandbox server if use of a proxy server is configured in the
general application settings of Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

By default, integration with Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution components is disabled. You can
enable or disable the integration, and configure the following integration settings via the command line, Web
Console, and Administration Console:

   Configure general KATA/NDR/Sandbox server connection settings.

   Add or remove KATA/NDR/Sandbox server certificates.

   Configure two-way authentication when connecting to KATA/NDR/Sandbox servers and add client certificates.

   Configure event forwarding.

   Enable or disable telemetry (only when integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)).


     If integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response is
     enabled, process exclusions are not applied when sending telemetry.



  Managing Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform integration settings in Kaspersky Security Center Cloud
  Console is not supported.




                                                      461
Configuring EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can enable or disable the EDR (KATA) and NDR (KATA) components and configure the
integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform in
the policy properties (Application settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and Response
(KATA) and Application settings → Detection and Response → Network Detection and Response (KATA)).


   Managing Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform component integration settings in Kaspersky Security
   Center Cloud Console is not supported.


Integration settings

                       Setting                                                           Description

   Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) /   Enables or disables the EDR (KATA) component or the NDR (KATA) component.
   Network Detection and Response (KATA)      The components are disabled by default.
   enabled/disabled

   Execution prevention for objects is        Enables or disables EDR (KATA) rules for execution prevention for objects.
   enabled/disabled

                                                 Execution prevention rules for objects can be applied only if the EDR (KATA) component
                                                 is enabled.


                                              This toggle switch is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
                                              Response (KATA).

   Server connection settings                 The Configure link opens the Server connection settings window, where you can configure
                                              general settings for connecting to KATA/NDR servers, add a server certificate, and configure
                                              two-way authentication when connecting to KATA/NDR servers.

   KATA servers / NDR servers                 The table contains a list of KATA/NDR servers to which connection is configured.
                                              The Add button opens a window where you can configure the connection to the KATA/NDR
                                              server.
                                              You can use the buttons above the table to edit and remove previously configured connection
                                              settings.

   Maximum delay when sending events (sec)    The maximum delay in sending events to the KATA/NDR server in seconds.
                                              The default value is 30 .

   Maximum number of events in one package    Maximum number of events in one package.
                                              The default value is 1024 .
                                              The field is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response
                                              (KATA).

   Server poll frequency (sec)                NDR server polling period in seconds.
                                              The default value is 450 .
                                              The check box is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Network Detection and
                                              Response (KATA).

   Enable event throttling                    Enables or disables the regulation of the number of events sent to the KATA/NDR server.

   Maximum number of events per hour          Maximum number of events per hour
                                              The default value is 3000 .

   Event throttle threshold (percentage)      Event throttle threshold (percentage). Sending events is limited if ratio of events of one type
                                              (for example, events about registry changes) to the total number of events exceeds the set
                                              threshold (as a percentage).
                                              The default value is 15 .




                                                                462
KATA/NDR server connection settings window
In this window, you can configure general settings for connecting to KATA/NDR servers, add a server certificate,
and configure two-way authentication when connecting to KATA/NDR servers.

Server connection settings

                   Setting                                                              Description

  Send a synchronization request to the   Frequency of sending synchronization requests to the KATA/NDR server in minutes.
  KATA/NDR server every (min)             The default value is 5 .

  Maximum time to wait for the server     Maximum time to wait for a connection to the KATA/NDR server in seconds.
  connection (sec)
                                          The default value is 10 .

  Maximum time to wait for a response     Maximum time to wait for a response from the KATA/NDR server in seconds.
  from the server (sec)                   The default value is 10 .

  Allow sending telemetry                 Enables or disables sending data about events on devices (telemetry) to the KATA server.
                                          Sending telemetry is enabled by default.
                                          The check box is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
                                          (KATA).

  Server certificate                      After adding the server certificate, information about the certificate is displayed:
                                              certificate serial number
                                              certificate subject
                                              certificate issuer
                                              certificate issue date
                                              certificate expiration date

  Add                                     Opens a standard file selection window where you can specify the path to the KATA/NDR server
                                          certificate.
                                          If a server certificate has been added, the server certificate is verified on the Kaspersky Endpoint
                                          Security side. This elevates the security of the connection.

  Remove                                  Deletes the server certificate added previously.
                                          The button is displayed only if a server certificate has been added.

  Additional connection protection        The settings section lets you enable or disable two-way authentication when connecting to the
                                          KATA/NDR server and add a client certificate.

  Use two-way authentication              Enables or disables the use of two-way authentication to further secure the connection to the
                                          KATA/NDR server.


                                             Two-way authentication must be enabled on the KATA/NDR server side.



                                          To use two-way authentication, you need to add a client certificate.

  Add a client certificate                Opens a standard file selection window where you can specify the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX
                                          archive) with the client certificate and private key.
                                          The button is available if the Use two-way authentication check box is selected.

  Edit                                    Allows you to specify the password for the cryptocontainer with the client certificate. The
                                          Cryptocontainer password field cannot be edited. By default, the password is empty.
                                          To specify a password, click Edit. In the window that opens, enter the password and click OK. Clicking
                                          the Show button in the window displays the password in clear text in the password entry window.


                                             It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms
                                             ensure that the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.




                                                                      463
Server connection settings window
In this window you can specify the connection settings to the KATA/NDR server.

Server connection settings

   Setting                                                                    Description

  Address      KATA/NDR server address. IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the integration server can be specified.
               To ensure that communication with the KATA server is not interrupted if the application fails when network isolation is enabled for the
               device, it is recommended to specify the server's IP address.
               Default value: 127.0.0.1 .

  Port         Port for connecting to the KATA/NDR server.
               The default value for the KATA server is 443 .
               The default value for the NDR server is 8081 .




Configuring EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can enable or disable the EDR (KATA) and NDR (KATA) components and
configure the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack
Platform in the policy properties (Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) and
Detection and Response → Network Detection and Response (KATA)).

Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform integration settings

                     Setting                                                                    Description

  Enable Endpoint Detection and Response             This check box enables or disables the EDR (KATA) component or the NDR (KATA) component.
  (KATA) / Enable Network Detection and              The components are disabled by default.
  Response (KATA)

  Enable execution prevention for objects            This check box enables or disables EDR (KATA) rules for execution prevention for objects.



                                                        Execution prevention rules for objects can be applied only if the EDR (KATA) component is
                                                        enabled.


                                                     The check box is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
                                                     Response (KATA).

  KATA servers / NDR servers                         The Configure button opens a window where you can configure a connection to KATA/NDR
                                                     servers, as well as view a list of servers to which a connection has been configured.

  Server connection settings                         Clicking the Configure button opens a window where you can configure general settings for
                                                     connecting to KATA/NDR servers, add a server certificate, and configure two-way authentication
                                                     when connecting to KATA/NDR servers.

  Data transfer settings                             Clicking the Configure button opens a window where you can configure settings for transfer of
                                                     data to KATA/NDR servers.




KATA servers / NDR servers window
The table in the window displays the list of settings for connecting to KATA/NDR servers. For each server for
which a connection is configured, the table indicates an IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or the server's fully qualified
domain name (FQDN) and port.

                                                                        464
You can use the buttons and the menu above the table to perform the following actions:

    Add KATA/NDR server connection settings

    Edit or remove previously configured connection settings

    Export or import the list of configured connection settings



KATA Server / NDR Server window
In this window you can specify the KATA/NDR server connection settings.

Server connection settings

   Setting                                                                      Description

  Address      KATA/NDR server address. IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the integration server can be specified.
               To ensure that communication with the KATA server is not interrupted if the application fails when network isolation is enabled for the
               device, it is recommended to specify the server's IP address.
               Default value: 127.0.0.1 .

  Port         Port for connecting to the KATA/NDR server.
               The default value is 443 .




Server connection settings window
In this window, you can configure general settings for connecting to KATA/NDR servers.

KATA/NDR server connection settings

                  Setting                                                                     Description

  Send a synchronization request to the       Frequency of sending synchronization requests to the KATA/NDR server in minutes.
  KATA/NDR server every (min)                 The default value is 5 .

  Maximum time to wait for the server         Maximum time to wait for a connection to the KATA/NDR server in seconds.
  connection (sec)                            The default value is 10 .

  Maximum time to wait for a response         Maximum time to wait for a response from the KATA/NDR server in seconds.
  from the server (sec)                       The default value is 10 .

  Allow sending telemetry                     This check box enables or disables sending data about events on devices (telemetry) to the KATA
                                              server.
                                              Sending telemetry is enabled by default.
                                              The check box is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
                                              (KATA).

  Server certificate                          The section contains buttons for adding or removing a server certificate.

  Add (server certificate)                    Opens adding a server certificate window.
                                              The button is displayed if the server certificate has not been added yet.

  Remove (server certificate)                 Deletes the server certificate added previously.
                                              The button is displayed only if a server certificate has been added.

  Additional connection protection            This section contains controls for configuring additional security of the connection using two-way
                                              authentication.

  Use two-way authentication                  This check box enables or disables two-way authentication to further secure the connection to the
                                              KATA/NDR server.
                                              To use two-way authentication, you need to add a client certificate.
                                              Two-way authentication must be enabled on the KATA/NDR server side.


                                                                          465
                   Setting                                                                   Description

  Add (client certificate)                    Opens the window for adding a client certificate for additional security of the connection with the
                                              KATA/NDR server.
                                              The button is displayed if the Use two-way authentication check box is selected and the client
                                              certificate has not yet been added.



                                                 If you want to configure additional protection for the connection, enable verification of the client
                                                 certificates on the KATA/NDR server side and select the Use two-way authentication check box
                                                 in this window.



  Remove (client certificate)                 Removes the client certificate.
                                              The button is displayed if a client certificate has been added.




Adding a server certificate window
In this window, you can add a KATA/NDR server certificate in one of the following ways:

    Specify the path to the certificate file in the Add from file field. The Browse button opens the standard file
    selection window. Specify the path to the file that contains the certificate in DER or PEM format.

    Copy the contents of the certificate file to the Enter certificate details field.

If a server certificate has been added, the server certificate is verified on the Kaspersky Endpoint Security side.
This elevates the security of the connection.



Adding a client certificate window
In this window, you can add a client certificate to further secure the connection with the KATA/NDR server.


  If you want to configure additional protection for the connection, enable verification of the client certificates
  on the KATA/NDR server side and select the Use two-way authentication check box in the server connection
  settings window.


To add a client certificate, specify the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate
and private key. The Browse button opens the standard file selection window. If the archive is password-protected,
enter the password in the Crypto container password field.



Data transfer settings window
In this window, you can configure settings for sending data to KATA/NDR servers.

Settings for sending data to KATA/NDR servers

             Setting                                                                   Description

  Maximum delay when              The maximum delay in sending events to the KATA/NDR server in seconds.
  sending events (sec)            The default value is 30 .

  Maximum number of               Maximum number of events in one package.
  events in package               The default value is 1024 .
                                  This field is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA).

                                                                        466
             Setting                                                                    Description

  Server poll frequency           Frequency of sending synchronization requests to the NDR server in seconds.
                                  The default value is 450 .
                                  This field is displayed only when integrating with Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA).

  Enable event throttling         Enables or disables the regulation of the number of events sent to the KATA/NDR server.

  Maximum number of               Maximum number of events per hour
  events per hour
                                  The default value is 3000 .

  Event throttle threshold        Number of events above the limit (percentage). Sending events is limited if ratio of events of one type (for example,
  (percentage)                    events about registry changes) to the total number of events exceeds the set threshold (as a percentage).
                                  The default value is 15 .




Configuring EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) on the command line
On the command line, you can manage the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the
following components of the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution:

    The Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component using the predefined task: Kaspersky
    Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration (KATAEDR)

    The Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) component using the predefined task: Kaspersky
    Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration (KATANDR)

By default, the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration and Kaspersky Network Detection
and Response (KATA) Integration are not running. You can start and stop these tasks manually.

You can manage the settings of the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) integration and the
settings of the Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) integration by editing the settings of the
predefined tasks.

Using the commands for managing the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Platform integration settings,
you can manage certificates that are used for connecting to KATA/NDR servers.




Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task
settings
The table describes all available settings and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task.

Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task settings

                Setting                                                  Description                                                 Value

   Address                                KATA server address                                                          Default value: 127.0.0.1 .
                                          IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the
                                          integration server can be specified.
                                          To ensure that communication with the KATA server is not interrupted
                                          if the application fails when network isolation is enabled for the device,
                                          it is recommended to specify the server's IP address.

   Port                                   Port to connect to the KATA server.                                          The default value is 443 .




                                                                        467
                Setting                                                 Description                                                Value

   UseClientPinnedCertificate            Enable and disable two-way authentication to further secure the            Yes – use two-way
                                         connection to the KATA server.                                             authentication to further secure
                                         If two-way authentication is enabled on the KATA server side, you need     the connection to the KATA
                                         to enable two-way authentication in the settings of Kaspersky              server.
                                         Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task and add the        No (default value) — do not use
                                         client certificate before starting the task.                               two-way authentication.

   SynchronizationPeriod                 Frequency of sending synchronization requests to the KATA server in        The default value is 5 .
                                         minutes.

   ConnectionTimeout                     Maximum time to wait for a connection to the KATA server in seconds.       The default value is 10 .

   RequestTimeout                        Maximum time to wait for a response from the KATA server in seconds.       The default value is 10 .

   MaximumDataTransferTime               The maximum delay in sending events to the KATA server in seconds.         The default value is 30 .

   UseRequestCountLimits                 Enable and disable regulating the number of events sent to the KATA        Yes (default value) – regulate
                                         server.                                                                    the number of events sent.
                                                                                                                    No – do not regulate the
                                                                                                                    number of events.

   MaximumNumberOfEventsInHour           Maximum number of events per hour                                          The default value is 3000 .

   EventLimitExceededPercentage          Number of events above the limit (percentage). Sending events is           The default value is 15 .
                                         limited if the ratio of events of a certain type to the total number of
                                         events exceeds the configured threshold (as a percentage).

   EnableTelemetry                       Enable and disable sending event data (telemetry) to the KATA server.      Yes (default value) – send
                                                                                                                    telemetry to the KATA server.
                                                                                                                    No – do not send telemetry.




Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task
settings
The table describes all available settings and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task.

Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA) Integration task settings

                 Setting                                                 Description                                              Value

   UseClientPinnedCertificate               Enable and disable two-way authentication to further secure the        Yes — use two-way
                                            connection to the NDR server.                                          authentication to further secure
                                            If client certificate validation is enabled on the NDR server side,    the connection to the NDR
                                            enable the use of a client certificate and add a client certificate    server.
                                            before starting the Kaspersky Network Detection and Response           No (default value) — do not use
                                            (KATA) Integration task.                                               two-way authentication.

   SynchronizationPeriod                    Frequency of sending synchronization requests to the NDR server        The default value is 5 .
                                            in minutes.

   ConnectionTimeout                        Maximum time to wait for a connection to the NDR server in             The default value is 10 .
                                            seconds.

   RequestTimeout                           Maximum time to wait for a response from the NDR server in             The default value is 10 .
                                            seconds.

  The [Endpoints.item_#] section contains the address and port of the NDR server.

   Address                                  NDR server address.                                                    Default value: 127.0.0.1 .
                                            IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of
                                            the integration server can be specified.

   Port                                     Port for connecting to the NDR server.                                 The default value is 8081 .

  The [EventTransferSettings] section contains settings for sending events to the NDR server.

   MaximumDataTransferTime                  The maximum delay in sending events to the NDR server in seconds.      The default value is 30 .

   MaximumNumberOfEventsInPackage           Maximum number of events in one package.                               The default value is 1024 .

                                                                       468
               Setting                                          Description                                              Value

  UseRequestCountLimits             Enable or disable regulating the number of events sent to the         Yes (default value) – regulate the
                                    KATA/NDR server.                                                      number of events sent.
                                                                                                          No – do not regulate the number
                                                                                                          of events.

  MaximumNumberOfEventsInHour       Maximum number of events per hour                                     The default value is 3000 .

  EventLimitExceededPercentage      Event throttle threshold (percentage). Sending events is limited if   The default value is 15 .
                                    the ratio of events of a certain type to the total number of events
                                    exceeds the configured threshold (as a percentage).

  PingPeriod                        NDR server polling period in seconds.                                 The default value is 450 .




Managing certificates for connecting to the KATA server / NDR server

  Managing certificates requires the rights of a user with the Administrator (admin) role.


You can manage certificates used to connect to the KATA server / NDR server using commands. You can do the
following with certificates:

   Add or replace the server certificate

   Display information about the server certificate

   Remove the server certificate

   Add or replace the client certificate

   Display information about the client certificate

   Remove the client certificate

To add or change a server certificate,

  run one of the following commands:


   If you are configuring the integration using the Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component:
   kesl-control [-R] --add-kataedr-server-certificate < file path >

   If you are configuring the integration using the Network Detection and Response (KATA) component:
   kesl-control [-R] --add-katandr-server-certificate < file path >

where < file path > is the path to the file containing the server certificate.
To add or change a client certificate:

 1. Run one of the following commands:

      If you are configuring the integration using the Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component:
       kesl-control [-R] --add-kataedr-client-certificate < file path >




                                                              469
      If you are configuring the integration using the Network Detection and Response (KATA) component:
       kesl-control [-R] --add-katandr-client-certificate < file path >

   where < file path > is the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate and
   private key.

 2. If the cryptocontainer is password-protected, enter the password when prompted.


  The client certificate is used for additional protection of the connection with the KATA server / NDR server if
  client certificate verification is enabled in the KATA server / NDR server settings and in the task settings of
  the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) Integration or Kaspersky Network Detection and
  Response (KATA) Integration task, UseClientPinnedCertificate is set to yes.


To display information about the server certificate,

  run one of the following commands:


   If you are configuring the integration using the Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component:
   kesl-control [-R] --query-kataedr-server-certificate

   If you are configuring the integration using the Network Detection and Response (KATA) component:
   kesl-control [-R] --query-katandr-server-certificate

To display information about the client certificate,

  run one of the following commands:


   If you are configuring the integration using the Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component:
   kesl-control [-R] --query-kataedr-client-certificate

   If you are configuring the integration using the Network Detection and Response (KATA) component:
   kesl-control [-R] --query-katandr-client-certificate

Running the command displays the following certificate information:

   certificate serial number

   certificate subject

   certificate issuer

   certificate start date

   certificate expiration date

   SHA1 and SHA256 certificate fingerprints




                                                       470
To remove a server certificate,

  run one of the following commands:


    If you are configuring the integration using the Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component:
    kesl-control [-R] --remove-kataedr-server-certificate

    If you are configuring the integration using the Network Detection and Response (KATA) component:
    kesl-control [-R] --remove-katandr-server-certificate

To remove a client certificate,

  run one of the following commands:


    If you are configuring the integration using the Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component:
    kesl-control [-R] --remove-kataedr-client-certificate

    If you are configuring the integration using the Network Detection and Response (KATA) component:
    kesl-control [-R] --remove-katandr-client-certificate



Configuring the KATA Sandbox integration in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can enable and disable the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the KATA
Sandbox component and configure integration settings in the policy properties (Application settings →
Detection and Response → Sandbox).


  Settings for integration with KATA Sandbox cannot be managed via Kaspersky Security Center Cloud
  Console.


Settings for integration with KATA Sandbox

          Setting                                                                  Description

  Sandbox is                 Enables or disables integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the KATA Sandbox component.
  enabled/disabled           The integration is disabled by default.

  Server connection          The Configure link opens the Server connection settings window, where you can configure general settings for
  settings                   connecting to Central Node servers responsible for interaction with KATA Sandbox, add a server certificate, and
                             configure two-way authentication when connecting to Sandbox servers.

  Sandbox servers            The table contains a list of Central Node servers responsible for interaction with KATA Sandbox and to which a
                             connection is configured.
                             The Add button opens the Sandbox server window, where you can configure a connection to the Sandbox server.
                             You can use the buttons above the table to edit and remove previously configured connection settings.




Sandbox server connection settings window
In this window, you can configure general settings for connecting to the Central Node servers responsible for
interaction with KATA Sandbox (also referred to as Sandbox servers), add a server certificate, and configure two-
way authentication for connecting to Sandbox servers.


                                                                       471
Sandbox server connection settings

                 Setting                                                                     Description

  Maximum time to wait for the              Maximum time to wait for a connection to the server in seconds.
  server connection (sec)
                                            The default value is 10 .

  Maximum time to wait for a                Maximum time to wait for a response from the server in seconds.
  response from the server (sec)            The default value is 10 .

  Maximum directory size (MB)               The maximum size of the scan request queue in megabytes.
                                            The default value is 1024 .

  Server certificate                        After adding the server certificate, information about the certificate is displayed:
                                                certificate serial number
                                                certificate subject
                                                certificate issuer
                                                certificate issue date
                                                certificate expiration date

  Add                                       Opens a standard file selection window where you can specify the path to the server certificate.
                                            If a server certificate has been added, the server certificate is verified on the Kaspersky Endpoint
                                            Security side. This elevates the security of the connection.

  Remove                                    Deletes the server certificate added previously.
                                            The button is displayed only if a server certificate has been added.

  Additional connection protection          The settings section lets you enable or disable two-way authentication when connecting to the Sandbox
                                            server and add a client certificate.

  Use two-way authentication                Enables or disables the use of two-way authentication to further secure the connection to the server.



                                               Two-way authentication must be enabled on the Sandbox server side.


                                            To use two-way authentication, you need to add a client certificate.

  Add a client certificate                  Opens a standard file selection window where you can specify the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX
                                            archive) with the client certificate and private key.
                                            The button is available if the Use two-way authentication check box is selected.

  Edit                                      Allows you to specify the password for the cryptocontainer with the client certificate. The
                                            Cryptocontainer password field cannot be edited. By default, the password is empty.
                                            To specify a password, click Edit. In the window that opens, enter the password and click OK. Clicking the
                                            Show button in the window displays the password in clear text in the password entry window.


                                               It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms
                                               ensure that the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.




Sandbox server window
In this window you can specify the settings of the connection to the Central Node server responsible for
interaction with KATA Sandbox (hereinafter also referred to as the Sandbox server).

Sandbox server connection settings

   Setting                                                                 Description

  Address      Address of the server. IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the integration server can be specified.
               Default value: 127.0.0.1 .

  Port         Port for connecting to the server.
               The default value is 443 .




                                                                          472
Configuring the KATA Sandbox integration on the command line
On the command line, you can manage the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the
KATA Sandbox component using the predefined task: KATA Sandbox Integration.

By default, the KATA Sandbox Integration task is not running. You can start and stop this task manually.


  The Integration with KATA Sandbox task cannot be started if the server certificate has not been added.


If the KATA Sandbox Integration task is running, you can use the command line to send files to KATA Sandbox for
scanning.

To send files to KATA Sandbox for scanning, run the following command:

   kesl-control [-X] --sandbox < file path >


  where < file path > is the path to the file or directory that you want to scan. You can specify multiple paths by
  separating them with a space.


You can configure the KATA Sandbox component integration settings by editing the settings for the predefined
task.

Using the commands for managing the KATA Sandbox integration settings, you can manage certificates that are
used for connecting to Central Node servers responsible for interaction Sandbox servers.



KATA Sandbox Integration task settings
The table below describes all available settings and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for
the KATA Sandbox Integration task.

KATA Sandbox Integration task settings

             Setting                                             Description                                                      Value

   UseClientCertificate         Enables or disables two-way authentication for additional protection of the      Yes — use two-way authentication to
                                connection to the Central Node server responsible for interaction with           further secure the connection to the
                                KATA Sandbox (hereinafter also referred to as the Sandbox server).               Sandbox server.
                                If client certificate validation is enabled on the Sandbox server side, enable   No (default value) — do not use two-
                                the use of a client certificate and add a client certificate before starting     way authentication.
                                the KATA Sandbox Integration task.

   ConnectionTimeout            Maximum time to wait for a connection to the server in seconds.                  The default value is 10 .

   RequestTimeout               Maximum time to wait for a response from the server in seconds.                  The default value is 10 .

  The [Servers.item_#] section contains the settings of the Central Node server responsible for interaction with KATA Sandbox (the Sandbox
  server).

   Address                      Address of the server.                                                           Default value: 127.0.0.1 .
                                IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the
                                integration server can be specified.

   Port                         Port for connecting to the server.                                               The default value is 443 .




                                                                         473
           Setting                                            Description                                                    Value

  The [SandboxTransferSettings] section contains settings for sending files for scanning in KATA Sandbox.

  SandboxQueue                 The maximum size of the scan request queue in megabytes.                     The default value is 1024 .




Managing certificates for connecting to the Sandbox server

  Managing certificates requires the rights of a user with the Administrator (admin) role.


You can manage certificates used to connect to the Central Node servers responsible for interaction with KATA
Sandbox (Sandbox servers) using commands. You can do the following with certificates:

   Add or replace the server certificate

   Display information about the server certificate

   Remove the server certificate

   Add or replace the client certificate

   Display information about the client certificate

   Remove the client certificate

To add or replace the server certificate, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-X] --add-sandbox-server-certificate < file path >


  where < file path > is the path to the file containing the server certificate.


To add or change a client certificate:

 1. Execute the command:
   kesl-control [-X] --add-sandbox-client-certificate < file path >
   where < file path > is the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate and
   private key.

 2. If the cryptocontainer is password-protected, enter the password when prompted.


  The client certificate is used for additional protection of the connection to the Sandbox server if client
  certificate verification is enabled in the Sandbox server settings and if in the settings of the KATA Sandbox
  Integration task, UseClientCertificate is set to yes.


To display certificate information, run the following command:

   for the server certificate:
   kesl-control [-X] --query-sandbox-server-certificate



                                                                     474
   for the client certificate:
   kesl-control [-X] --query-sandbox-client-certificate

  Running the command displays the following certificate information:


   certificate serial number

   certificate subject

   certificate issuer

   certificate start date

   certificate expiration date

   SHA1 and SHA256 certificate fingerprints

To delete the server certificate information, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-X] --remove-sandbox-server-certificate


To delete the client certificate information, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-X] --remove-sandbox-client-certificate




Integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and
Analysis Platform
Kaspersky Endpoint Security is compatible with the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform solution
(hereinafter also KUMA).

Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform is a comprehensive software solution that provides the
following functionality:

   Receiving, processing, and storing information security events (telemetry).

   Analysis and correlation of incoming data.

   Search within the obtained events.

   Creation of notifications upon detecting symptoms of information security threats.

For more information about the solution, see the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Help .




                                                       475
When integrated with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform, devices running Kaspersky Endpoint
Security establish encrypted connections with the KUMA server. To ensure a secure connection, the following
certificates issued by the KUMA server are used:

   KUMA server certificate. The connection is encrypted using the server's TLS certificate. You can elevate the
   security of the connection by verifying the server certificate on the Kaspersky Endpoint Security side. To do
   this, add the KUMA server certificate before enabling the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform
   Integration.

   Client certificate. This certificate is used for additional protection of the connection using two-way
   authentication (scanning devices with Kaspersky Endpoint Security KUMA server). The same client certificate
   can be used by multiple devices. By default, the KUMA server does not check client certificates, but two-way
   authentication can be enabled on the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform side. In this case, you
   need to enable two-way authentication in the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform integration
   settings and add the client certificate (cryptocontainer with certificate and private key).

The certificates for securing the connection to the KUMA server are provided by the administrator of Kaspersky
Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform.

A proxy server is used to connect to the KUMA server if use of a proxy server is configured in the general
application settings of Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

By default, Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform integration is disabled. You can enable or disable
the integration, and configure the following integration settings via the command line, Web Console, and
Administration Console:

   Configure general KUMA server connection settings.

   Add or remove KUMA server certificates.

   Configure two-way authentication when connecting to KUMA servers and add client certificates.

   Manage event transfer settings.

Before enabling integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform, make sure one of the
following conditions is satisfied:

   You are using Kaspersky Endpoint Security under a license that covers the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and
   Analysis Platform functionality.

   You have purchased a separate license for the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform functionality
   and added the license key for the additional functionality (KUMA key) to the application.


  If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, activation is
  performed on the Protection Server (a component of Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light
  Agent) by adding license keys to SVMs.




Configuring the KUMA integration in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can enable or disable the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with
Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform and manage the integration settings in the policy properties
(Application settings → KUMA Integration → KUMA Integration).


                                                       476
Settings for integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform

              Setting                                                                     Description

   KUMA Integration is               Enables or disables the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with Kaspersky Unified
   enabled/disabled                  Monitoring and Analysis Platform.
                                     The integration is disabled by default.

   Use encrypted connection          The check box enables or disables server certificate verification for additional protection of the connection to
                                     the KUMA server.
                                     To verify the server certificate, you need to select this check box and add the server certificate in the Server
                                     connection settings window.
                                     This check box is cleared by default.

   Server connection settings        The Configure link opens the Server connection settings window, where you can configure a timeout for
                                     connecting to KUMA servers, add a server certificate, and configure two-way authentication when connecting to
                                     KUMA servers.

   Table                             The table contains a list of KUMA servers to which connection is configured.
                                     The Add button opens the KUMA server window, where you can configure a connection to the KUMA server.
                                     You can use the buttons above the table to edit and remove previously configured connection settings.

   Maximum delay when                The maximum delay in sending events to the KUMA server in seconds.
   sending events (sec)              The default value is 30 .




KUMA server connection settings
In this window, you can configure general settings for connecting to KUMA servers, add a server certificate, and
configure two-way authentication when connecting to KUMA servers.

KUMA server connection settings

                 Setting                                                                      Description

   Maximum time to wait for the            Maximum time to wait for a connection to the KUMA server in seconds.
   server connection (sec)
                                           The default value is 5 .

   Server certificate                      After adding the server certificate, information about the certificate is displayed:
                                               certificate serial number
                                               certificate subject
                                               certificate issuer
                                               certificate issue date
                                               certificate expiration date

   Add                                     Opens a standard file selection window where you can specify the path to the KUMA server certificate.
                                           If a server certificate has been added, the server certificate is verified on the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                                           side. This elevates the security of the connection.

   Remove                                  Deletes the server certificate added previously.
                                           The button is displayed only if a server certificate has been added.

   Additional connection protection        The settings section lets you enable or disable two-way authentication when connecting to the KUMA
                                           server and add a client certificate.

   Use two-way authentication              Enables or disables the use of two-way authentication to further secure the connection to the KUMA
                                           server.



                                              Two-way authentication must be enabled on the KUMA server side.


                                           To use two-way authentication, you need to add a client certificate.

   Add a client certificate                Opens a standard file selection window where you can specify the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX
                                           archive) with the client certificate and private key.
                                           The button is available if the Use two-way authentication check box is selected.




                                                                          477
                  Setting                                                                       Description

   Edit                                       Allows you to specify the password for the cryptocontainer with the client certificate. The
                                              Cryptocontainer password field cannot be edited. By default, the password is empty.
                                              To specify a password, click Edit. In the window that opens, enter the password and click OK. Clicking the
                                              Show button in the window displays the password in clear text in the password entry window.



                                                 It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms
                                                 ensure that the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.




KUMA server window
In this window you can specify the KUMA server connection settings.

KUMA server connection settings

   Setting                                                                        Description

   Address       KUMA server address. IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the integration server can be specified. If you
                 selected the Use encrypted connection check box in the KUMA integration settings window, you must specify the fully qualified
                 domain name (FQDN) of the server from the certificate received when purchasing the license to use KUMA.

   Port          Port for connecting to the KUMA server.
                 The default value is 443 .

   Protocol      Protocol for connecting to the KUMA server: TCP or UDP.



                    When selecting the UDP protocol, the use of certificates to provide connection protection is not supported, and there are no
                    events about the connection to the KUMA server.


                 The default is TCP.




Configuring the KUMA integration in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can enable and disable the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with
Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform and configure integration settings in the policy properties
(KUMA Integration → KUMA Integration).

Settings for integration with Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform

              Setting                                                                     Description

   Enable KUMA                    Enables or disables the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the Kaspersky Unified
   Integration                    Monitoring and Analysis Platform solution.
                                  KUMA Integration is disabled by default.

   Use encrypted                  The check box enables or disables server certificate verification for additional protection of the connection to the
   connection                     KUMA server.
                                  To verify the server certificate, you need to select this check box and add the server certificate in the KUMA servers
                                  window.
                                  This check box is cleared by default.

   KUMA servers                   The Configure button opens the KUMA servers window. In this window, you can configure a connection to KUMA
                                  servers and view the list of servers to which a connection is configured.




                                                                            478
             Setting                                                                  Description

  KUMA server                    Clicking the Configure button opens the Server connection settings window where you can configure general
  connection settings            settings for connecting to KUMA servers, add a server certificate, and configure two-way authentication when
                                 connecting to KUMA servers.

  Maximum delay when             The maximum delay in sending events to the KUMA server in seconds.
  sending events (sec)
                                 The default value is 30 .




KUMA servers window
The table in the window displays the list of settings for connecting to KUMA servers. For each server to which a
connection is configured, the table indicates:

    IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the server. If you selected the Use encrypted
    connection check box in the KUMA integration settings window, you must specify the fully qualified domain
    name (FQDN) of the server from the certificate received when purchasing the license to use KUMA.

    Port for connecting to the KUMA server.

    Protocol used to connect to the KUMA server.

You can use the buttons and the menu above the table to perform the following actions:

    Add KUMA server connection settings

    Edit or remove previously configured connection settings

    Export or import the list of configured connection settings




KUMA server window
In this window you can specify the KUMA server connection settings.

KUMA server connection settings

   Setting                                                                     Description

  Address       KUMA server address. IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the integration server can be specified. If you
                selected the Use encrypted connection check box in the KUMA integration settings window, you must specify the fully qualified
                domain name (FQDN) of the server from the certificate received when purchasing the license to use KUMA.

  Port          Port for connecting to the KUMA server.
                The default value is 443 .

  Protocol      Protocol for connecting to the KUMA server: TCP or UDP.



                   When selecting the UDP protocol, the use of certificates to provide connection protection is not supported, and there are no
                   events about the connection to the KUMA server.


                The default is TCP.




                                                                         479
KUMA server connection settings window
In this window, you can configure general settings for connecting to KUMA servers.

KUMA server connection settings

                Setting                                                             Description

  Maximum time to wait for the    Maximum time to wait for a connection to the KUMA server in seconds.
  server connection (sec)
                                  The default value is 5 .

  Server certificate              The section contains buttons for adding or removing a server certificate.

  Add (server certificate)        Opens adding a server certificate window.
                                  The button is displayed if the server certificate has not been added yet.

  Remove (server certificate)     Removes the server certificate.
                                  The button is displayed only if a server certificate has been added.

  Additional connection           This section contains controls for configuring additional security of the connection using two-way
  protection                      authentication.

  Use two-way authentication      The check box enables or disables the use of two-way authentication for additional protection of the
                                  connection to the KUMA server.
                                  To use two-way authentication, you need to add a client certificate.
                                  Two-way authentication must be enabled on the KUMA server side.

  Add (client certificate)        Opens the window for adding a client certificate for security of the connection with the KUMA server.
                                  The button is displayed if the client certificate has not been added yet.



                                     If you want to configure additional protection for the connection, enable verification of the client
                                     certificates on the KUMA server side and select the Use two-way authentication check box in this
                                     window.



  Remove (client certificate)     Removes the client certificate.
                                  The button is displayed if a client certificate has been added.

  Use two-way authentication      Enables or disables the use of two-way authentication to further secure the connection to the KUMA server.
                                  To use two-way authentication, you need to add a client certificate.



                                     Two-way authentication must be enabled on the KUMA server side.




Adding a server certificate window
In this window, you can add a KUMA server certificate in one of the following ways:

    Specify the path to the certificate file in the Add from file field. The Browse button opens the standard file
    selection window. Specify the path to the file that contains the certificate in DER or PEM format.

    Copy the contents of the certificate file to the Enter certificate details field.

If a server certificate has been added, the server certificate is verified on the Kaspersky Endpoint Security side.
This elevates the security of the connection.




                                                                    480
Adding a client certificate window
In this window, you can add a client certificate to further secure the connection with the KUMA server.


   If you want to configure additional protection for the connection, enable verification of the client certificates
   on the KUMA server side and select the Use two-way authentication check box in the KUMA server
   connection settings window.


To add a client certificate, specify the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate
and private key. The Browse button opens the standard file selection window. If the archive is password-protected,
enter the password in the Crypto container password field.



Configuring the MDR integration on the command line
On the command line, you can manage the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Unified
Monitoring and Analysis Platform using the predefined task: Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform
Integration.

By default, the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration task is not running. You can start
and stop this task manually.

You can configure Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration settings by editing the settings
of the predefined task.

Using the commands for managing the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration settings,
you can manage certificates that are used for connecting to KUMA servers.




Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration task settings
The table describes all available settings and the default values of all the settings that you can specify for the
Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration task.

Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration task settings

            Setting                               Description                                                      Value

   UseTls                        Enable or disable the server certificate          Yes — use a certificate to further secure the connection to the
                                 verification for additional protection of the     KUMA server.
                                 connection to the KUMA server.
                                                                                   No (default) — do not use a certificate to secure the connection to
                                                                                   the KUMA server.

   UseClientCertificate          Enable and disable two-way authentication         Yes — use two-way authentication to further secure the connection
                                 to further secure the connection to the           to the KUMA server.
                                 KUMA server.
                                                                                   No (default value) — do not use two-way authentication.
                                 If client certificate validation is enabled on
                                 the KUMA server side, enable the use of a
                                 client certificate and add a client certificate
                                 before starting the Kaspersky Unified
                                 Monitoring and Analysis Platform Integration
                                 task.

   ConnectionTimeout             Maximum time to wait for a connection to          The default value is 5 .
                                 the KUMA server in seconds.

                                                                          481
          Setting                               Description                                                   Value

  The [Servers.item_#] section contains the settings of the KUMA server.

  ServerAddress                KUMA server address.                            Default value: 127.0.0.1 .
                               IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) or fully qualified
                               domain name (FQDN) of the integration
                               server can be specified.
                               If you set UseTls=Yes , you must specify
                               the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of
                               the server from the certificate received
                               when purchasing the license to use KUMA.

  ServerPort                   Port for connecting to the KUMA server.         The default value is 443 .

  ServerProtocol               Protocol for connecting to the KUMA server.     tcp (default value) — use the TCP protocol to connect to the KUMA
                                                                               server.
                                                                               udp — use the UDP protocol to connect to the KUMA server.



                                                                                  When the UDP protocol is selected, the use of certificates to
                                                                                  provide connection protection is not supported (the values of
                                                                                  the UseTls , UseClientCertificate and
                                                                                  ConnectionTimeout settings are ignored), and there are no
                                                                                  events about the connection to the KUMA server.



  The [SiemTransferSettings] section contains settings for sending events to the KUMA server.

  EventTransferTimeMax         The maximum delay in sending events to the      The default value is 30 .
                               KUMA server in seconds.




Managing certificates for connecting to the KUMA server

  When selecting the UDP protocol, the use of certificates to provide connection protection is not supported.



  Managing certificates requires the rights of a user with the Administrator (admin) role.


You can manage certificates used to connect to the KUMA server using commands. What you can do with
certificates:

   Add or replace the server certificate

   Display information about the server certificate

   Remove the server certificate

   Add or replace the client certificate

   Display information about the client certificate

   Remove the client certificate

To add or replace the server certificate, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-M] --add-kuma-server-certificate < file path >



                                                                         482
  where < file path > is the path to the DER or PEM file containing the server certificate.


To add or change a client certificate:

 1. Execute the command:
   kesl-control [-M] --add-kuma-client-certificate < file path >
   where < file path > is the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate and
   private key.

 2. If the cryptocontainer is password-protected, enter the password when prompted.


  The client certificate is used for additional protection of the connection to the KUMA server if client
  certificate verification is enabled in the KUMA server settings and in the Integration with Kaspersky Unified
  Monitoring and Analysis Platform task settings, the UseClientCertificate setting is set to yes.


To display certificate information, run the following command:

   for the server certificate:
   kesl-control [-M] --query-kuma-server-certificate

   for the client certificate:
   kesl-control [-M] --query-kuma-client-certificate

  Running the command displays the following certificate information:


   certificate serial number

   certificate subject

   certificate issuer

   certificate start date

   certificate expiration date

   SHA1 and SHA256 certificate fingerprints

To delete the server certificate information, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-M] --remove-kuma-server-certificate


To delete the client certificate information, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-M] --remove-kuma-client-certificate




                                                       483
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
Integration
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum is a solution for protecting an organization's IT
infrastructure from threats such as exploits, ransomware, fileless attacks, and legitimate system tools used by
attackers to compromise devices or data.

Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum monitors and analyzes the evolution of threats, and
provides information about a potential attack to a security officer or administrator, helping them perform threat
response actions in a timely manner.

Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
solution is facilitated by a Kaspersky Endpoint Security component: Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
(EDR Optimum).

Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux is compatible with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
Optimum version 3.1.

Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum uses the following Threat Intelligence tools:

   The Kaspersky Security Network (hereinafter also referred to as KSN) cloud service infrastructure that
   provides access to Kaspersky file, website, and software reputation online knowledge base.

   Integration with the Kaspersky Threat Intelligence Portal , which contains and displays information about the
   reputation of files and websites.

   The Kaspersky Threats      database.

When interacting with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can:

   Send data about events on devices to Kaspersky Security Center. Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends
   monitoring data on processes, open network connections, and modified files to Kaspersky Security Center, as
   well as data on threats detected by the application and data on the processing results for these threats.

   Perform response actions to ensure security when receiving commands from Kaspersky Security Center.

Integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum involves the following steps:

   1   Enabling required components of Kaspersky Endpoint Security

       Make sure that the following components of Kaspersky Endpoint Security are enabled and working:

          File Threat Protection.

          Web Threat Protection.

          Behavior Detection.




                                                       484
2   Enabling threat analysis tools

    Make sure that Kaspersky Security Network is enabled in standard or extended mode.


      For the most effective operation of Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, we recommend
      the extended Kaspersky Security Network mode.


3   Activating the EDR Optimum component

    Make sure one of the following conditions is satisfied:

       You are using Kaspersky Endpoint Security under a license that includes the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection
       and Response Optimum functionality.

       You have purchased a separate license for the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
       functionality and also added the license key for the EDR Optimum additional functionality (EDR Optimum key)
       to the application.

4   Installing the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum management plug-in

    The Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum management plug-in is a unified plug-in for managing
    agents on Windows, Mac, and Linux operating systems; the plug-in is necessary to display and view alert details.

5   Enabling the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Integration

    By default, the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
    Optimum is disabled. You can enable, disable, or configure the integration:

       Using the Web Console.

       Using the command line.


          Managing the EDR Optimum component using Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is not
          supported.


    You can check the status of the EDR Optimum component:

       Using the Application component status report in the Web Console.

       The Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum component has been added to the list of Kaspersky
       Endpoint Security components. For detailed information about reports, please refer to the Kaspersky
       Security Center Help .

       In the device properties in the Web Console.

       Using the command line.

6   Enabling data transfer to the Administration Server

    To use all functionality of Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, you must configure the
    following:

       Enable sending information about files in Backup and Quarantine to the Kaspersky Security Center storage.
       To do this, you need to select the following check boxes in the policy properties:

           Inform about files in Backup

           Inform about files in Quarantine
                                                        485
           Allow display of alert list To do this, you can enable the Show EDR alerts toggle switch in the main window of
           Kaspersky Security Center Web Console under Settings → Interface settings.


             The Show EDR alerts setting not available in a Web Console version earlier than 15.1.




Enabling or disabling Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response Optimum integration
You can enable or disable the EDR Optimum component.

   Using the Web Console.

   Using the command line.


  The Administration Console does not support managing the settings for integrating Kaspersky Endpoint
  Detection and Response Optimum.




Enabling or disabling Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
integration in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can enable or disable the EDR Optimum component and configure the integration with
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum:

   In the policy properties (Application settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and
   Response Optimum).

   In the managed device properties (Assets (Devices) → Managed devices → <device name> link →
   Applications tab → <Kaspersky Endpoint Security application name> link → Application settings tab →
   Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum).


     The EDR Optimum component cannot be enabled or disabled in the device properties if a policy is applied
     to the device.


   Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration settings

                     Setting                                                                Description

     Endpoint Detection and Response             Enables or disables the EDR Optimum component, which is necessary for integrating Kaspersky
     Optimum is enabled/disabled                 Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum solution.
                                                 The toggle button is switched off by default.

     Network isolation                           The Configure device unblocking link opens the Configure device unblocking window, where
                                                 you can configure the duration of device blocking.

     Exclusions                                  The Configure exclusions link opens the Exclusions window, where you can configure network
                                                 isolation exceptions.




                                                                    486
Enabling or disabling Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
integration on the command line
You can enable or disable the EDR Optimum component by using the UseEdrOptimum setting in the general
application settings.

You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

To enable the EDR Optimum component using command line options:

  kesl-control --set-app-settings UseEdrOptimum=Yes


To disable the EDR Optimum component using command line options:

  kesl-control --set-app-settings UseEdrOptimum=No



Viewing the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
Optimum integration status

Viewing the integration status in the Web Console

You can view the status of the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum integration in Web Console
by selecting the Assets (Devices) section → Managed devices → <device name> link → Applications tab → <
Kaspersky Endpoint Security application name> link → General tab → Components.


Viewing the integration status on the command line

You can view the status of integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum using the
command line by running the command kesl-control --app-info.


Integration statuses

One of the following statuses is displayed for the EDR Optimum component:

   Running.
   This status is displayed when the following conditions are simultaneously satisfied:

      A license key required by EDR Optimum is added.

      The current date is earlier than the license expiration date.

      One or more Kaspersky Endpoint Security components that EDR Optimum requires are enabled.

      Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Integration is enabled on the device.

                                                        487
   Stopped.
   This status is displayed in the following cases:

      Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Integration is disabled.

      The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application is not stopped.

   Not supported by license.
   This status is displayed in the following cases:

      The current date is later than the license expiration date.

      The current license does not include the EDR Optimum functionality.

   Malfunction.
   This status is displayed when the following conditions are simultaneously satisfied:

      The current date is earlier than the license expiration date.

      One or more Kaspersky Endpoint Security components that EDR Optimum requires has run into an error.



Viewing information about a detected threat and response
actions
To view all information about a detected threat and perform appropriate threat response actions, you can use the
alert details window, which contains:

   Threat development chain graph

   Recommendations for responding to the threat with the UI for performing the chosen action

   General information about the threat detection (for example, the detection mode)

   Information about the protected device

   Information about the detected object

   History of files appearing on the device

   Information about the threat response actions performed by the application




                                                        488
In the alert details window, you can perform the following threat response actions:

   Isolate the device on which the threat was detected

   Quarantine file

   Create an IOC Scan task


  The storage period for the alert details is 30 days. After this time expires, old entries are automatically
  deleted.


For more details about managing alert details, refer to the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
Help .



Searching for indicators of compromise
An Indicator of Compromise (IOC) is a set of data about an object or activity that indicates unauthorized access
to a device (compromised data). For example, an indicator of compromise could be a high number of failed login
attempts. When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Detection and Threat Response solutions, you can
detect indicators of compromise on protected devices and perform threat response actions.

The IOC Scan functionality is available in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application if one of the following
conditions is satisfied:

   Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
   solution is enabled and the EDR Optimum component is activated.

   Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
   component is enabled and the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution is activated.

When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the IOC scan is performed in the
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) solution.

When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, an IOC Scan is performed using the
IOC Scan task. You can create IOC Scan tasks:

   In the Web Console

   From the alert details window

   in the command line

The IOC Scan task checks for IOC terms (properties of IOC objects, for example, a file hash) only in the operating
system's main namespace. The IOC Scan task does not calculate hashes of files larger than 200 MB.

To search for indicators of compromise, Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses IOC files prepared by the user. If you
want to add an indicator of compromise manually, please see IOC file requirements. If the IOC file does not meet
the requirements, the application will not be able to use it.

IDs of all IOC files used in an IOC Scan task must be unique. If you load multiple IOC files with the same ID, the
application only uses one of those IOC files. The other IOC files will be automatically excluded.



                                                         489
Searching for indicators of compromise in the Web Console

  You can scan for indicators of compromise using the IOC Scan task in Web Console only when integrated with
  Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum. When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection
  and Response (KATA), the IOC scan is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
  solution.


You can create and run the IoC Scan task, as well as edit its settings in the Web Console.


  For the IOC Scan task, the Wake-on-LAN feature is not available in the schedule settings. For the task to run,
  make sure the device is powered on.


You can change the main settings of the IOC Scan task in the task properties on the Application settings tab →
IOC Scan settings.

IOC Scan task settings
          Setting                                                                   Description

  Redefine IOC files      This button opens the Redefine IOC files panel.
                          Clicking the Add IOC files button located in the Redefine IOC files panel opens a window where you can select and
                          download the IOC files on the device that are necessary to search for indicators of compromise. After uploading the IOC
                          files, you can view a list of indicators from the IOC files.

  Export IOC collection   Clicking this button downloads IOC files to the device.




                                                                     490
      Setting                                                                 Description

Apply response        This check box enables or disables the application of response actions when indicators of compromise are detected.
actions when an IOC   If the check box is selected, then when indicators of compromise are detected, the application performs the actions you
is detected
                      selected:
                          Isolate device from the network.
                          If this check box is selected, then when indicators of compromise are detected, the application isolates the device
                          from the network to prevent the spread of the threat. You can configure the isolation duration.



                             If the policy applies to an isolated device, the Automatically disable isolation after a specified period and
                             Network isolation exclusions settings specified in the policy properties are applied. If the policy does not apply
                             to the isolated device, the settings specified in the device properties are applied.


                          Quarantine a copy, delete the object.
                          If the check box is selected, when indicators of compromise are detected, the application quarantines a copy of the
                          object and deletes the original object.
                          Start critical areas scan.
                          If this check box is selected, then when indicators of compromise are detected, the application starts the Critical
                          Areas Scan task.
                          By default, Kaspersky Endpoint Security scans the kernel memory, running processes, boot sectors, and other
                          critical areas.


                                /lib/systemd

                                /lib/udev

                                /lib/dbus-1.0

                                /usr/local/lib/systemd/user

                                /usr/share/dbus-1

                                /usr/share/gdm/autostart

                                /usr/share/gnome/autostart

                                /var/spool/at

                                /var/spool/at/spool

                                /var/spool/anacron

                                /var/spool/cron

                                /boot

                                /bin

                                /sbin

                                /lib

                                /lib32

                                /lib64

                                /libx32

                                /usr/lib

                                /usr/lib32

                                /usr/lib64

                                /usr/libx32

                                ~/.config/autostart

                                ~/.config/autostart-scripts

                                ~/.config/plasma-workspace/env

                                ~/.config/plasma-workspace/shutdown

                                ~/.config/lxsession



                                                                 491
          Setting                                                                         Description
                                           ~/.fluxbox/startup

                                           ~/.kde/Autostart

                                           /etc

                              If the check box is cleared, the application does not perform any response actions when indicators of compromise are
                              detected. Information about detected indicators of compromise is displayed in the window with alert details and in the
                              task properties.


You can change the additional settings of the IOC Scan task in the task properties on the Application settings
tab → Additional.


   The Additional section can be edited if you have loaded an IOC file in the Redefine IOC files panel.


Additional settings of the IOC Scan task

                Setting                                                                        Description

   Data types (IOC documents) to            The check boxes in the Additional section include the following data types (IOC documents) in the analysis
   analyze during IOC Scan                  during an IOC scan:
                                                  Processes - ProcessItem.
                                                  Files - FileItem.

                                                      IOC documents.



                                                    The IOC documents link is available if you have loaded an IOC file in the Redefine IOC files panel.
                                                    This link takes you to the File Scan settings – FileItem window, where you can add scan scopes.


                                                  ARP tables - ArpEntryItem.
                                                  Network ports - PortItem.
                                                  User accounts - UserItem.
                                                  System objects - SystemItem.

   Scan predefined areas                    The check box enables or disables checking of the following predefined scopes:
                                                  Files on all drives of the device.
                                                  Files on system drives of the device.
                                                  Critical areas on the device.

   Scan custom areas                        The check box adds the scopes listed in the table under the check box to the list of scan scopes.
                                            You can add a path to the scope you want to scan by clicking the Add button. In the window that opens,
                                            enter the path to the scope in the Scope field and save the changes.
                                            You can remove a scope from the table by select the check box next to the scope you want to remove and
                                            then clicking the Remove button.




   We do not recommend adding or deleting IOC files after starting this task. This may result in incorrect display
   of IOC scan results for previous runs of the task. We recommend creating a new task to run an IOC scan
   based on new IOC files.


You can view the result of the IOC Scan task in the task properties in the Web Console under Application settings
→ IOC Scan results. The table displays a list of devices on which the IOC Scan task has been run, as well as the
results of the task. In the Device drop-down list, you can choose to display task results for all managed devices on
which the task has run, or for a specific device.

The table contains the following information:

    Status – Status of indicator of compromise detection, displayed as an icon.

    Device – Name of the device on which the task was started


                                                                           492
   Time – Date and time when the task was performed

   Results – Information about the result of the IOC Scan task. One of the following statuses may be displayed:

      IOCs detected –– This status is displayed as a link; clicking the link opens a window with the alert details.

      No IOCs detected.


  IOC Scan results are stored for 30 days. After this time expires, Kaspersky Endpoint Security automatically
  deletes old entries.




Searching for indicators of compromise in the command line

  You can scan for indicators of compromise using the IOC Scan task on the command line only when integrated
  with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum. When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint
  Detection and Response (KATA), the IOC scan is performed in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
  Response (KATA) solution.


To create, configure, and run an IOC Scan task from the command line, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-T] --scan-ioc --path < path to directory or file > [--process on|off] [-
  -hint < regular expression >] [--arpentry on|off] [--ports on|off] [--system on|off] [--
  files on|off] [--drives all|system|critical|custom] [--excludes < list of exclusions >]
  [--scope < list of directories >] [--action
  Skip|QuarantineFile|IsolateHost|ScanCriticalAreas]


  where:


   --path < path to directory or file > – path to IOC file or directory with IOC files with the .IOC or .XML
   extension, which should be used to perform the scan.


     You can specify multiple paths by separating them with a space. You can also specify both types of paths
     (path to a file and path to a directory).


   --process – enable analysis of processes running on the device.
   Possible arguments:

      on – enable analysis of processes running on the device (default value).

      off – disable analysis of processes running on the device.

   If you do not specify the --process option, the application analyzes processes only if the used IOC file
   specifies the details of these processes (ProcessItem).

   --hint < regular expression > – regular expression that matches the full path to the file (FileItem) or
   executable file of the process (ProcessItem) to be analyzed.



                                                        493
You can use the following regular expression elements:

   meta characters: . ^ $ |

   character classes: digit, alpha, lower, upper, cntrl

   quantifiers: * + ? {n} {n,} {n, m}

   negation: [^a-c]

   escaped characters: \a \e \f, \n \r \t \v \b

--arpentry – enable analysis of entries in the ARP table (ArpEntryItem).
Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of entries in the ARP table (default value).

   off – disable analysis of entries in the ARP table.

If you do not specify the --arpentry option, the application analyzes the ARP table only if the used IOC file
specifies the details of the ARP table (ArpEntryItem).
--ports – enable analysis of ports open for connection.
Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of ports open for connection and scan active connections on the device (default
   value).

   off – disable analysis of ports open for connection and do not scan active connections on the device.

If you do not specify the --ports option, the application only analyzes ports if the used IOC file specifies the
details of these ports (PortItem).

--system – enable analysis of the system environment.
Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of the system environment (default value).

   off – disable analysis of the system environment.

If you do not specify the --system option, the application analyzes the system environment only if the used
IOC file specifies details of the system environment (SystemInfoItem).

--files – enable file analysis.
Possible arguments:

   on – enable file analysis (default value).

   off – disable file analysis.

If you do not specify the --files option, the application analyzes files only if the used IOC file specifies the
details of those files (FileItem).

--drives – areas to be scanned.

                                                          494
Possible arguments:

   all – check all available file areas.

   system – scan all files within the root file system.

   critical – scan files in user and system directories (default value).

   custom – scan only files in the areas you specify.

If you do not specify the --drives option, the application analyzes files in user and system directories.

--excludes < list of exclusions > – list of paths excluded from scans.
The exclusions specified by this option are global and are valid regardless of the scope type or directory list.
These exclusions take precedence over other command line options, including --hint and --scope.


  Exclusions are specified as paths, but cannot contain recursive elements or wildcard characters (e.g. *).


If you do not specify the --excludes option, the scan is performed without exclusions.
You can specify multiple exclusions by separating them with a space.

--scope < list of directories > – list of additional directories to be scanned.


  This option is required if you specified the custom argument for the --drives option.


--action – action performed when indicators of compromise are detected.
Possible arguments:

   Skip – the application will not perform any actions with the detected object, but information about it will be
   saved in the task execution results (default value).

   QuarantineFile – the application will quarantine the detected object.

   IsolateHost – the application imposes network isolation on the device on which the object is detected.

   ScanCriticalAreas – the application will perform scan critical areas.


         /lib/systemd

         /lib/udev

         /lib/dbus-1.0

         /usr/local/lib/systemd/user

         /usr/share/dbus-1

         /usr/share/gdm/autostart

         /usr/share/gnome/autostart
                                                      495
        /var/spool/at

        /var/spool/at/spool

        /var/spool/anacron

        /var/spool/cron

        /boot

        /bin

        /sbin

        /lib

        /lib32

        /lib64

        /libx32

        /usr/lib

        /usr/lib32

        /usr/lib64

        /usr/libx32

        ~/.config/autostart

        ~/.config/autostart-scripts

        ~/.config/plasma-workspace/env

        ~/.config/plasma-workspace/shutdown

        ~/.config/lxsession

        ~/.fluxbox/startup

        ~/.kde/Autostart

        /etc


You can specify multiple actions by separating them with commas.


  If you specify the Skip argument, do not add any other arguments. The Skip argument can only be used
  on its own.




                                                 496
Requirements for IOC files
When creating IOC Scan tasks, consider the following IOC file requirements and limitations:

    The application supports IOC files with the .IOC or .XML extension in OpenIOC format versions 1.0 and 1.1, an
    open standard for describing indicators of compromise.

    Semantic errors and unsupported IOC terms and tags in IOC files do not cause the task to fail. For such
    sections of IOC files, the application registers the absence of a match.

    IDs of all IOC files used in an IOC Scan task must be unique. Duplicate IDs may affect the correctness of task
    results.

    We recommend creating an IOC file for each threat. This makes the results of the IOC Scan task easier to read.

The file that can be downloaded by clicking the link below contains a table with the full list of IOC terms of the
OpenIOC standard.



          DOWNLOAD THE "IOC_Terms.xlsx" FILE

Special considerations and limitations of the way the application supports the OpenIOC standard are listed in the
table below.

Features and limitations of the OpenIOC standard versions 1.0 and 1.1

   Supported conditions                     OpenIOC 1.0:
                                                  is
                                                  isnot (as an exclusion from the set)
                                                  contains
                                                  containsnot (as an exclusion from the set)

                                            OpenIOC 1.1:
                                                  is
                                                  contains
                                                  starts-with
                                                  ends-with
                                                  matches
                                                  greater-than
                                                  less-than

   Supported attributes of                  OpenIOC 1.1:
   conditions                                     preserve-case
                                                  negate

   Supported operators                      AND
                                            OR

   Supported data types                     "date" : date (applicable conditions: is , greater-than , less-than )
                                            "int" : integer (applicable conditions: is , greater-than , less-than )
                                            "string" : string (applicable conditions: is , contains , matches , starts-with , ends-with )
                                            "duration" : duration in seconds (applicable terms: is , greater-than , less-than )




                                                                         497
  Special considerations for      The "boolean string" , "restricted string" , "md5" , "IP" , "sha256" , "base64Binary" data
  interpreting data types         types are interpreted as strings.
                                  The application supports the interpretation of the Content parameter for int and date data types
                                  specified as intervals:
                                      OpenIOC 1.0:
                                      Using the TO operator in the Content field:
                                      <Content type="int">49600 TO 50700</Content>
                                      <Content type="date">2009-04-28T10:00:00Z TO 2009-04-28T16:00:00Z</Content>
                                      <Content type="int">[154192 TO 154192]</Content>
                                      OpenIOC 1.1:

                                          Using greater-than and less-than conditions
                                          Using the TO operator in the Content field

                                  The application supports the interpretation of the date and duration data types if the indicators are
                                  specified in the ISO 8601, Zulu time zone, UTC format.




Start process
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Detection and Response solutions, you can remotely run
processes and executable files on a protected device using the Run process task.


  You can create and run tasks to run a process in Web Console only when integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint
  Detection and Response Optimum. When integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
  (KATA) component, the tasks are generated and run on the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
  (KATA) side.


Using the Start process task, you can start:

   Processes stopped as a result of malicious activity on the device.

   Processes stopped by you. For example, you can remotely start a process that you have stopped using the
   Terminate process task.

   Scripts. For example, you can run a script to collect data from the device to investigate a threat.

   Utilities. For example, you can run a utility that saves device configuration information to a file.

   Applications.


  If SELinux is installed in your operating system in Enforcing mode, starting the Start process task requires
  additional configuration of SELinux.


You can create and run the Start process task, as well as edit its settings in the Web Console: The Start process
task cannot be managed on the command line.




                                                              498
Start process task settings

        Setting                                                                      Description

   Executable             Field for entering the command to start the process.
   command                For example, if you want to run the klnagchk tool, which checks the connection to the Administration Server, enter
                          /<absolute path to the directory with the utility>/klnagchk and then, if necessary, fill in the other fields
                          described in the table below.

   Command line           Field for entering command line arguments to pass additional input to the script, utility, or application at startup.
   arguments              For example, you can enter the -logfile /tmp/klnagchk.log argument. This argument tells the tool to save the result to
   (optional)
                          a file named klnagchk.log in /tmp .
                          If you need to pass multiple arguments, they must be separated with spaces.
                          For example, you can enter -logfile /tmp/klnagchk.log -savecert /home/user/certificate.cer arguments.
                          These arguments tell the tool to save the result to a file named klnagchk.log in /tmp , and to save the certificate used to
                          test access to the Administration Server in the certificate.cer file in /home/user .

   Working directory      Field for entering the path to the working directory in which the command from the Executable command field is executed.
   path (optional)        For example, you can enter /tmp and run the klnagchk utility with the following arguments: -logfile klnagchk.log -
                          savecert certificate.cer . In this case, both files are created in /tmp .


You can view the result of the Start process task in the task properties in the Web Console under Application
settings → Execution results.

The table displays a list of devices on which the Start process task has been run, as well as the results of the task.
In the Device drop-down list, you can choose to display task results for all managed devices on which the task has
run, or for a specific device.

The table contains the following information:

    Status – Task completion status

    Device – Name of the device on which the task was started

    Time – Date and time when the task was performed

    Results – Task execution result in the form of a return code The link with the return code opens the Task
    results window, which displays the following information:

        task completion status

        process start time

        process completion time

        name of the device on which the process was started

        executed command

        command line arguments

        working directory path

        return code

By clicking the Download STDOUT stream link in the Task results window, you can download a report about the
successful execution of the task in TXT format. If the Start process task failed, you will see an error message if you
try to download this report.




                                                                          499
By clicking the Download STDERR stream link in the Task results window, you can download a report about errors
that occurred during execution of the tax in TXT format. If the Start process task completed successfully, you will
see an error message if you try to download this report.



Terminate process
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Detection and Response solutions, you can remotely
terminate processes on a protected device using the Terminate process task.


   You can create and run tasks to terminate a process in Web Console only when integrated with Kaspersky
   Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum.


Using the Terminate process task, you can terminate:

    Processes started on a device as a result of malicious activity.

    Processes started by you. For example, you can remotely terminate a process that you have started using the
    Start process task.

    Scripts. For example, you can remotely terminate a script that you have started using the Start process task.

    Utilities. For example, you can remotely terminate an internet speed test utility that you started using the Start
    process task.

    Applications.


   You cannot terminate processes of System Critical Objects (SCOs). SCOs include files that are necessary for
   the operation of the operating system and the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.


You can create and run the Terminate process task, as well as edit its settings in the Web Console: The Terminate
process task cannot be managed on the command line.

Terminating a process task settings

                 Setting                                                                 Description

   Specify the file whose             In the drop-down list, you can select how to specify the path to the file:
   processes you want to                  By path to directory and checksum
   terminate                              By full path
                                          By PID


                                         The By PID value is present in the drop-down list only for tasks created in device properties.




   Full path to file                  Field for entering the full path to the file.
                                      This field is displayed only if in the Specify the file whose processes you want to terminate drop-down list,
                                      you selected By full path.

   Checksum type                      In the drop-down list, you can select the file checksum type:
                                          MD5.
                                          SHA256.
                                      This drop-down list is displayed if you select By path to directory and checksum in the Specify the file
                                      whose processes you want to terminate drop-down list.




                                                                          500
                 Setting                                                                      Description

   File checksum                         Field for entering the file checksum.
                                         This field is displayed if in the Specify the file whose processes you want to terminate drop-down list, you
                                         selected By path to directory and checksum, and in the Checksum type drop-down list, you selected MD5.

   Directory path                        Field for entering the path to the directory of the file.
                                         This field is displayed if in the Specify the file whose processes you want to terminate drop-down list, you
                                         selected By path to directory and checksum.

   Process ID                            Process ID (PID) entry field.
                                         This field is displayed if in the Specify the file whose processes you want to terminate drop-down list, you
                                         selected By PID.


You can view the result of the Terminate process task in the task properties in the Web Console under Results.



Receiving a file from a device
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Detection and Response solutions, you can get files from a
protected device using the Get file task.


   You can create and run tasks to get a file from a device in Web Console only when integrated with Kaspersky
   Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum. When integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
   Response (KATA) component, the tasks are generated and run on the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
   Response (KATA) side.


For example, you can receive an event log file that was generated by a third-party application.

You can create and run the Receiving a file from a device task, as well as edit its settings in the Web Console: The
Receive file from device task cannot be managed on the command line.

The Receive file from device task is performed for files specified in the task properties on the Application
settings tab, in the Receive file table.

The table contains the following information about the files that the task is supposed to get:

    Directory path – Path to the directory on the device where the file is located.

    Checksum verification type – File checksum verification type.

Using the buttons above the table, you can add, change, or delete information about the files you want to get from
the device.

To add information about the file you want to get, you need to click the Add button and specify the task settings
in the Receive file window that opens.

Receive file from device task settings

            Setting                                                                      Description

   Specify the file to           In the drop-down list, you can select how to specify the path to the file:
   receive                           By path to directory and checksum
                                     By full path

   Full path to file             Field for entering the full path to the file.
                                 This field is displayed if in the Specify the file to receive drop-down list, you selected By full path.




                                                                             501
           Setting                                                                     Description

  Checksum type            In the drop-down list, you can select the file checksum type:
                               MD5.
                               SHA256.
                           This drop-down list is displayed if you select By path to directory and checksum in the Specify the file to receive
                           drop-down list.

  File checksum            Field for entering the file checksum.
                           This field is displayed if in the Specify the file to receive drop-down list, you selected By path to directory and
                           checksum.

  Path to file directory   Field for entering the path to the directory of the file.
                           This field is displayed if in the Specify the file to receive drop-down list, you selected By path to directory and
                           checksum.


As a result of the Receiving a file from a device task, a copy of the file is quarantined on the device. You can use
the Web Console to download this copy from Quarantine to the device from which you initiated the download.


  The file size must not exceed 100 MB.


The original file on the user device remains in its original directory.


  In Kaspersky Security Center, in the list of quarantined files, all files received through the Receive file from
  device task will have the Infected status regardless of the file scan results.


The Receive file from device task ends with an error if:

   The specified file is not found.

   Incorrect file information (file name or checksum) is specified.

   Insufficient rights to manage the specified file.

   The specified file is blocked.

   Insufficient space in Quarantine.

   The specified file is too big (more than 100 MB).

You can view the result of the Start process task in the task properties in the Web Console under Results.




                                                                      502
Delete file from device
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Detection and Response solutions, you can remove files
from a protected device using the Delete file task.


   You can create and run tasks to delete a file in Web Console only when integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint
   Detection and Response Optimum.



   System Critical Objects (SCOs) cannot be deleted. SCOs include files that are necessary for the operation of
   the operating system and the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.


You can create and run the Delete file from device task, as well as edit its settings in the Web Console: The Delete
file from device task cannot be managed on the command line.

Delete file from device task settings

              Setting                                                                       Description

   Specify the file to be           In the drop-down list, you can select how to specify the path to the file to be deleted:
   deleted                              By path and checksum
                                        By full path

   Full path to file                Field for entering the full path to the file to be deleted.
                                    This field is displayed if in the Specify the file to be deleted drop-down list, you selected By full path.

   Checksum type                    In the drop-down list, you can select the type of the checksum of the file to be deleted:
                                        MD5.
                                        SHA256.
                                    This drop-down list appears if you select By path to directory and checksum in the Specify the file to be deleted
                                    drop-down list.

   File checksum                    Field for entering the checksum of the file to be deleted.
                                    This field is displayed if in the Specify the file to be deleted drop-down list, you selected By path and checksum.

   Directory path                   Field for entering the path to the directory of the file to be deleted.
                                    This field is displayed if in the Specify the file to be deleted drop-down list, you selected By path and checksum.

   Include subdirectories           This check box enables or disables subdirectories.




   If the file is blocked by another process, the task is displayed with the Completed status, but the file itself is
   deleted only after the device is restarted. After restarting the device, make sure that the file was deleted.


If you are trying to delete a running executable file, the Delete file from device task may finish with an Access
denied error. In this case, you need to create and run the Terminate process task for the file, and then try again.

You can view the result of the Start process task in the task properties in the Web Console under Results.




                                                                            503
Quarantine file
You can quarantine files that you consider dangerous to your device:

    Using the Quarantine a file task.

    On the command line.

    From the alert details window.


   Moving files to quarantine is available only if integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
   Optimum solution is enabled and the EDR Optimum component is activated. Restoring and deleting files from
   quarantine is available regardless of whether integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
   Optimum is enabled and the EDR Optimum component is enabled.


You can create and run a Quarantine file task for all managed devices or for a specific device, as well as change its
settings in the Web Console.


   To manage quarantined files in Kaspersky Security Center, you need to enable the transfer of data about
   quarantined files to the Administration Server.



   You cannot quarantine System Critical Objects (SCO). SCOs include files that are necessary for the operation
   of the operating system and the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.


The Quarantine file task is performed for files listed in the task properties on the Application settings tab, in the
Quarantine file table.

The table contains the following information about the files that need to be quarantined:

    Path – Path to the directory on the device where the file is located.

    Checksum type – File checksum verification type.

Using the buttons above the table, you can add or delete information about the files you want to quarantine.

To add information about the file you want to quarantine, you need to click the Add button and specify the task
settings in the window that opens.

Quarantine file task settings

              Setting                                                                 Description

   Specify the file you want to   In the drop-down list, you can select how to specify the path to the file to be quarantined:
   quarantine
                                      Specify file by full path
                                      Specify file by directory path and checksum




                                                                       504
              Setting                                                               Description

  Full path to file          Field for entering the full path to the file to be quarantined.
                             This field is displayed if in the Specify the file you want to quarantine drop-down list, you selected Specify file by
                             full path.



                                If the file is located on a network drive, enter the path to the file starting with the // characters. For
                                example, you can enter //server_ip/shared_folder .




  Checksum type              In the drop-down list, you can select the checksum type of the file to be quarantined:
                                 MD5.
                                 SHA256.
                             This drop-down list is displayed if in the Specify the file you want to quarantine drop-down list, you selected
                             Specify file by directory path and checksum.

  File checksum              Field for entering the checksum of the file to be quarantined.
                             This field is displayed if in the Specify the file you want to quarantine drop-down list, you selected Specify file by
                             directory path and checksum.

  File path                  Field for entering the path to the directory of the file to be quarantined.
                             This field is displayed if in the Specify the file you want to quarantine drop-down list, you selected Specify file by
                             directory path and checksum.


                                If the file is located on a network drive, enter the path to the file starting with the // characters. For
                                example, you can enter //server_ip/shared_folder .




If you are trying to quarantine a file that is too big, the Quarantine file task may finish with the Insufficient space in
Quarantine error. In this case, you can clear the quarantine or increase the quarantine size and then try again.

You can view the result of the Start process task in the task properties in the Web Console under Results.




Managing the Quarantine
Quarantine is a special storage location on the device for files that may be infected with viruses or cannot be
disinfected at the time of detection. Quarantine allows isolating a file for further investigation. In contrast to the
Quarantine, Backup stores backup copies of files that were deleted or modified during the disinfection process. If
Kaspersky Endpoint Security detects malicious code in a file, such a file is automatically placed in Backup.

The application only uses Quarantine when integrated with Detection and Response solutions to perform
recommended threat response actions. When the application is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response Optimum, you can also manually quarantine files that you consider dangerous for your device.

Quarantined files are stored in an encrypted form and do not threaten the security of the device. Quarantined files
may contain personal data.


  Some files can be critically important for the operation of the operating system and the application.
  Quarantining such files can disrupt the operation of the system.




                                                                    505
Placing a file in quarantine is possible only if one of the following conditions is met:

   Integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum is solution is enabled and the EDR
   Optimum component is activated.

   Integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component is enabled and the
   Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution is activated.


  The directory for storing quarantined files must be writable.


When integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component, files can be
quarantined using a task that is configured on the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) side.

When integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum solution, you can quarantine a
file in the following ways:

   Create and run a Quarantine File task in the Web Console.

   Run the Quarantine management command on the device.

   Follow the recommendation from the alert details.

A file may also be quarantined automatically as a result of detection of indicators of compromise.

For more information about managing Quarantine as part of solutions, see the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack
Platform Help and Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Help .

You can also manage quarantined files in Kaspersky Security Center or locally on the device using the command
line. You can view information about quarantined files, and delete and restore files from quarantine.


  To manage quarantined files in Kaspersky Security Center, you need to enable the transfer of data about
  quarantined files to the Administration Server.


Restoring, deleting, or retrieving a file from Quarantine is available regardless of whether integration with the
Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component or the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response Optimum solution is enabled, and regardless of whether a policy is applied to the device. Activation of
the EDR Optimum component and the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution also does not affect the
ability to perform these actions.

The general list of files quarantined by Kaspersky applications on client devices is kept in Kaspersky Security
Center and is available in the Administration Console (Advanced → Repositories → Quarantine) and the Web
Console (Operations → Repositories → Quarantine). Kaspersky Security Center does not copy files from
Quarantine storages to the Administration Server; all files are stored in Quarantine storages on client devices. For
detailed information about managing quarantined files in Kaspersky Security Center, refer to the Kaspersky
Security Center Help.

The quarantined file is restored to its original location according to the specified settings. Once the restoration
process is complete, the application deletes the quarantined copy of the restored file.




                                                           506
Restoring a file from quarantine fails in the following cases:

    The file to be restored was not found in the quarantine storage.

    The name of the file being restored is specified incorrectly or with the wrong case.

    The file ID was specified incorrectly.

    The destination folder has been deleted, moved, renamed, or you do not have access rights to it.
    In this case, the application moves the file to the folder /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/restored/. You can
    manually move the file from this folder to the desired folder.

    A file with the same name already exists at the specified path.

    The device does not have enough space.

Deleting a file from quarantine fails in the following cases:

    The file to be deleted was not found in the quarantine storage.

    The name of the file being deleted is specified incorrectly or with the wrong case.

    The file ID was specified incorrectly.

You can configure quarantine settings on a device using a policy in the Web Console or in the Administration
Console or using the command line. You can configure the following Quarantine settings:

    The percentage of Quarantine that must be full to generate an event about Quarantine being full. By default, an
    event is generated when the Quarantine is 90% full.

    Maximum size of the Quarantine in megabytes. When the maximum Quarantine size is reached, the application
    automatically deletes the oldest quarantined files. By default, the maximum Quarantine size is 200 MB if the
    application is being used in Standard mode, and 100 MB if the application is being used in Light Agent mode.



Editing Quarantine settings in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure Quarantine in the policy properties (Application settings → General
settings → Storage settings).

Quarantine settings

            Setting                                                              Description

  Limit the size of        Text box for entering the maximum size of the Quarantine (MB). If the check box is cleared, the size of quarantine is
  Quarantine to (MB):      not limited.
                           Possible values: 1–999999.
                           The default value is 200 if the application is being used in Standard mode, and 100 if the application is being used in
                           Light Agent mode.

  Notify when quarantine   Field for entering the percentage of Quarantine that must be full to generate an event about Quarantine being full. If
  is (%) full:             the check box is cleared, the event about Quarantine being full is not generated.
                           Available values: 1–100.
                           Default value: 90.




                                                                   507
Editing Quarantine settings in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure the Quarantine in the policy properties (General settings →
Storage settings).

Quarantine settings

           Setting                                                                  Description

  Limit the size of         This check box enables or disables limiting the maximum size of the Quarantine to the specified value (in megabytes). If
  Quarantine to (MB):       the check box is cleared, the size of quarantine is not limited.
                            Possible values: 1–999999.
                            The default value is 200 if the application is being used in Standard mode, and 100 if the application is being used in
                            Light Agent mode.

  Notify when quarantine    This check box enables or disables the limit on the percentage of Quarantine that must be full to generate an event
  is (%) full:              about Quarantine being full. If the check box is cleared, the event about Quarantine being full is not generated.
                            Available values: 1–100.
                            Default value: 90.




Editing Quarantine settings on the command line
On the command line, you can configure Quarantine using the QuarantineSizeLimit,
QuarantineFillingNotification, and QuarantineBackupFolder settings in the general application settings.

You can change the values of the settings with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that
contains all general application settings.

Quarantine settings

                 Setting                                      Description                                                 Value

   QuarantineFillingNotification         The percentage of Quarantine that must be full to         0–100
                                         generate an event about Quarantine being full.            0 – generating events about Quarantine being full
                                         To disable generating events about Quarantine             is disabled.
                                         being full, enter 0.                                      Default value: 90.

   QuarantineSizeLimit                   Maximum size of the Quarantine (in megabytes).            0–999999
                                         When the maximum Quarantine size is reached, the
                                                                                                   0 means the Quarantine size is not limited.
                                         application deletes the oldest files.
                                                                                                   The default value is 200 if the application is being
                                         To make the size of Quarantine unlimited, enter 0.        used in Basic mode, and 100 if the application is
                                                                                                   being used in Light Agent mode.

   QuarantineBackupFolder                Path to the directory in which the Backup and             Default value:
                                         Quarantine objects are stored. You can specify a          /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/objects-
                                         directory that is different from the default directory.   backup/
                                         You can use a directory on any device as the
                                         directory for storing Backup and Quarantine
                                         objects. It is not recommended to assign directories         Root privileges are required for access to
                                         that are located on remote devices, such as those            the default directory.
                                         mounted via the Samba and NFS protocols.
                                         If the specified directory does not exist or is
                                         unavailable, the application uses the default
                                         directory.




                                                                      508
Managing quarantined files on the command line
When integrated with Detection and Response solutions, on the command line, you can use Quarantine
management commands to:

   Quarantine files (only when integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum).

   View information about quarantined files.

   Delete all files or specified files from Quarantine.

   Restore files from Quarantine.


  Restoring infected files may lead to a device infection.



Quarantine file

To quarantine a file, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-Q] --put < file path > [--md5] [--sha256] [--save-original-file]


  where:


   < file path > is the path to the file that you want to quarantine.

   --md5 is the MD5 hash of the file that you want to quarantine.

   --sha256 is the SHA256 hash of the file that you want to quarantine.

   --save-original-file keeps the original file. If you do not specify this option, the original file is deleted.


    You can use this command only when integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response
    Optimum.



Viewing information about quarantined files

To view information about quarantined files, run the following command:

  kesl-control -Q --query ["< filter conditions >"] [-n < number >] [--json]




                                                          509
  where:


   < filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison
   operator > '< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results. If you do not
   specify any filter conditions, the application will display the details of all quarantined files.

   < number > is the number of the most recent quarantined files that you want to display. If you do not specify
   the -n option, the last 30 files are displayed. Specify 0 to show all files.

   --json: output data in JSON format.

The ObjectId line displays the numeric ID that the application assigned to the file when quarantining it. This ID is
used to perform actions on the file, such as restoring the file or deleting it from Quarantine.


Restore files from Quarantine

To restore a file from Quarantine under its original name to its original location, execute the following command:

  kesl-control -Q --restore < object ID >


  where < object ID > is a numeric ID that the application assigned to the file when quarantined.


To restore a file from Quarantine under a new name to a specified directory, execute the following command:

  kesl-control -Q --restore < object ID > --file < file path >


  where --file < file path > is the new name of the file and the path to the directory where you want to save
  the file.


  If the directory is deleted or the user does not have access rights to it, the application places the file in the
  /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/restored/ directory. You can manually move the file from this directory to the
  directory of your choice.


Delete files from Quarantine

To delete selected files from Quarantine, run the following command:

  kesl-control -Q --mass-remove --query "< filter conditions >"


  where < filter conditions > is one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison
  operator > '< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results.


  Examples:
  To delete files that contain "test" in their names or paths:

  kesl-control -Q --mass-remove --query "FileName like '%test%'"


To delete all files from Quarantine, run the following command:

  kesl-control -Q --mass-remove

                                                                 510
Sending information about quarantined files to Kaspersky
Security Center
To manage quarantined files in the Web Console, you need to enable the transfer of data about quarantined files
to the Administration Server.

To enable the transfer of data about quarantined files in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Policies and policy profiles.
   The list of policies opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the devices to which the policy is applied. To do so, click the link in
    the Current path field in the upper part of the window and select the administration group in the window that
    opens.
   The list displays the policies configured for the selected administration group.

 3. Click the name of the required policy in the list.
   The policy properties window opens.

 4. In the policy properties window, select Application settings → General settings → Storage settings.

 5. In the Settings for transferring data to the Administration Server, select the Inform about files in
    Quarantine check box.

 6. Save your changes.

As a result, you can view the list of files quarantined on the device in the Kaspersky Security Center console. In the
Web Console, you can perform actions with quarantined objects.




Network isolation
As part of a threat response action, a device can be isolated from the network.


Special considerations involved with network isolation

After enabling network isolation, the application severs all active network connections on the device and blocks all
new TCP/IP network connections, except for the connections listed below:

   Connections specified in exclusions from network isolation

   Connections initiated by Kaspersky Endpoint Security services

   Connections initiated by the Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent

   Connections with the SVM and the Integration Server if the application is being used in Light Agent mode



                                                         511
Network isolation can be applied when one of the following conditions is satisfied:

   Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
   solution is enabled and the EDR Optimum component is activated.

   Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
   component is enabled and the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution is activated.

Manually disabling network isolation is possible regardless of whether integration with Detection and Response
solutions is enabled, and regardless of whether a policy is applied to the device. Activation of the EDR Optimum
component and the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution also does not affect the ability to disable
network isolation.

When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), network isolation is enabled or
disabled, and network isolation exclusions are configured on the side of the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response (KATA) solution. For more details, see the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform Help . If necessary,
you can manually disable network isolation for a device in the device properties in the Web Console or on the
command line.

When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, network isolation can be applied in
one of the following modes:

   Automatic network isolation mode. A device can be isolated from the network automatically as a result of
   detection of indicators of compromise. When creating and configuring IOC Scan task settings in the Actions
   on IOC detection section, if you select the Apply response actions when an IOC is detected and Isolate
   device from the network check boxes, then network isolation is enabled automatically when the application
   detects indicators of compromise.
   You can manage the following automatic network isolation settings:

      Change the period of time after which network isolation is automatically disabled.

      Configure network isolation exclusions for automatically isolated devices.


     If a device that is being isolated automatically is subject to a policy, the settings specified in the policy are
     applied. If a policy is not applied, the settings specified in the device properties are applied.


   Manual network isolation mode. You can isolate a device from the network while the detected threat is being
   investigated. You can manually enable network isolation for a device in the alert details window and in the device
   properties in the Web Console.
   You can manage the following manual network isolation settings:

      Change the period of time after which network isolation is automatically disabled.

      Configure network isolation exclusions for manually isolated devices.

When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, you can manually disable network
isolation of a device in the device properties in the Web Console and on the command line.

You can check the network isolation status of a device on the command line.

An isolated device is automatically assigned the ISOLATED FROM NETWORK tag. This tag is automatically
removed when network isolation is disabled.



                                                         512
For general information on getting a list of isolated devices by tag, see the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response Optimum Help .


Network isolation limitations


  When you use network isolation, we strongly recommended that you familiarize yourself with the relevant
  limitations.


For network isolation to work, Kaspersky Endpoint Security must be running. If Kaspersky Endpoint Security
malfunctions (and the application is not running), traffic blocking is not guaranteed when network isolation is
enabled by Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform or Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum.

DHCP and DNS are not automatically added to network isolation exclusions, so if the network address of a
resource changes during network isolation, Kaspersky Endpoint Security cannot gain access to it. The same
applies to the nodes of the fault-tolerant KATA server. We recommend to not change their addresses so that
Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not lose contact with them.

The proxy server is not added automatically to the network isolation exclusions, so you need to add it to the
exclusions manually so that Kaspersky Endpoint Security does not lose contact with the KATA server.

Excluding a process from network isolation by name is supported on devices with kernel versions from 4.18 to 6.6
that support eBPF with BTF.

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in standard mode, we recommend doing the following when using network
isolation:

   Use a KSN proxy server to interact with Kaspersky Security Network.

   Use Kaspersky Security Center as a proxy server for application activation.
   If it is impossible to use Kaspersky Security Center as a proxy server, you must configure the proxy server that
   you want to use and add it to exclusions.

   Specify Kaspersky Security Center as the database update source.


  These recommendations do not apply if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is being used in Light Agent mode.




Manually enabling or disabling the network isolation of the device
in the Web Console

  You can enable network isolation for a device using Web Console only when integrated with Kaspersky
  Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum.




                                                       513
Enabling and disabling network isolation of a device manually when integrating with Kaspersky
Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum

To manually enable or disable network isolation for a device:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. Find your device in the list and click its name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

 6. In the application properties window that opens, on the Application settings tab, select Detection and
    Response and click the Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum link.

 7. This opens a window; in that window, under Network isolation, do one of the following:

       Click the Isolate device from the network button to enable network isolation of a device.
       When you click this button, the application isolates the device for the period you specified in the properties
       of the Enabling network isolation NetworkIsolationStart task.

       Click the Unblock an isolated device button to disable network isolation of the device.

 8. Click OK.

  If you enabled network isolation of the device, Kaspersky Endpoint Security assigns the ISOLATED FROM
  NETWORK tag to the device. If you disabled network isolation of a device, Kaspersky Endpoint Security
  removes this tag from the device.


Disabling network isolation of a device manually when integrating with Kaspersky Endpoint
Detection and Response (KATA)

To manually disable network isolation for a device:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. Find your device in the list and click its name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

                                                          514
 6. In the application properties window that opens, on the Application settings tab, select the Detection and
    Response section.

 7. Under Network isolation (Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)), click the Unblock an isolated device
    button to disable network isolation of the device.

  After disabling network isolation of a device, Kaspersky Endpoint Security removes the ISOLATED FROM
  NETWORK tag from the device.



Configuring the duration of automatic network isolation

  You can configure the duration of automatic network isolation only if integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint
  Detection and Response Optimum:


Network isolation of devices isolated by the IOC Scan task is automatically disabled after a certain length of time.
You can configure this timeout in the Web Console in the device properties and in policy properties.


  If a policy is applied to the device, the settings specified in the policy are applied; the automatic network
  isolation timeout cannot be configured in the device properties. If a policy is not applied to the device, the
  settings specified in the device properties are applied.


By default, the application disables network isolation 5 hours after it is enabled. With network isolation disabled,
the device can operate on the network without restrictions.


Configuring the automatic disabling of network isolation in the device properties

To configure the automatic disabling of device network isolation:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. Find your device in the list and click on its name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

 6. In the application properties window that opens, on the Application settings tab, select Detection and
    Response and click the Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum link.

 7. Under Network isolation, click Configure device unblocking.




                                                          515
 8. In the Configure device unblocking window that opens, specify the device unblock settings.


     Device unblocking settings

                      Setting                                                        Description

        Unblock an automatically isolated   This check box enables or disables automatic unblocking of an isolated device after the time
        device after:                       period specified in the input field below.
                                            The check box is selected by default.




 9. Save your changes.


Configuring the automatic disabling of network isolation in the policy properties

To configure the automatic disabling of device network isolation:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Policies and policy profiles.
   The list of policies opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the devices to which the policy is applied. To do so, click the link in
    the Current path field in the upper part of the window and in the opened window, select an administration
    group.
   The list displays the policies configured for the selected administration group.

 3. Click the name of the required policy in the list.
   The policy properties window opens.

 4. In the policy properties window, select Application settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint
    Detection and Response Optimum.

 5. Under Network isolation, click Configure device unblocking.

 6. In the Configure device unblocking window that opens, specify the device unblock settings.


     Device unblocking settings

                      Setting                                                        Description

        Unblock an automatically isolated   This check box enables or disables automatic unblocking of an isolated device after the time
        device after:                       period specified in the input field below.
                                            The check box is selected by default.




 7. Save your changes.



Manually configuring network isolation

  To manually isolate a device from the network, you need integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
  Response Optimum.




                                                               516
If you manually enable network isolation for a device, you can pre-configure network isolation using the Enabling
network isolation (NetworkIsolationStart) local task. You can configure network isolation exclusions and the
duration of network isolation for a device.

Enabling network isolation is a predefined task and runs only automatically in the following cases:

   If you click the Isolate device from the network button in the device properties.

   If you enable network isolation of the device in the alert details window.

You cannot create a new instance of the Enabling network isolation task by clicking the Add button or run the task
by clicking the Start button. This task is only available in the device properties, where you can change its settings
before enabling network isolation for the device.


  The Enabling network isolation task settings apply regardless of whether a policy is applied to the device.


To configure the network isolation parameters for a device:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. Find your device in the list and click on its name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Tasks tab.

 5. In the task list, click the Enabling network isolation task.
   The task properties window opens.

 6. Go to the Application settings tab.

 7. Click the Configure exclusions link to open the Exclusions window.

 8. In the window that opens, use the buttons above the table to perform the necessary action:

       If you want to add information about an excluded network connection, do so in one of the following ways:

          Click the Add button and enter information about the network connection.

          Click the Add from profile button and select a network profile from the dictionary.

       If you want to delete information about an excluded network connection, select the check box next to the
       network connection to be removed and click the Remove button.

 9. Click OK.

10. Enter the desired duration of network isolation of the device, in hours, in the Isolate the device for field.
   The default duration of network isolation is 5 hours.



                                                            517
   The minimum duration of network isolation is 1 hour.

 11. Click the Save button to save the changes made.



Configuring network isolation exclusions
When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA), the
exclusions from network isolation are configured in the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
solution. For more details, see the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform Help .

When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, you
can configure exclusions from network isolation in the following ways:

   In the policy properties in the Web Console. Exclusions configured in the policy are applied when network
   isolation is automatically enabled for a device that the policy is applied to.

   In the device properties in the Web Console. Exclusions configured in device properties are applied when
   network isolation is automatically enabled for a device that no policy is applied to.

   In the settings of the Enabling network isolation (NetworkIsolationStart) local task. Exclusions configured in the
   properties of this task are applied when you manually enable network isolation for a device. The Enabling
   network isolation task settings apply regardless of whether a policy is applied to the device.

For configuring exclusions from network isolation, the application provides a list of standard network profiles.
Network profiles consist of rules that ensure uninterrupted operation of devices with the DNS/DHCP server and
DNS/DHCP client roles. You can manage the settings of standard network profiles and configure exclusions
manually.




Configuring exclusions from automatic network isolation
You can configure network isolation exclusions for automatically isolated devices in policy properties or in device
properties.


  You can configure exclusions from network isolation only if integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
  Response Optimum:



Configuring exclusions from network isolation in policy properties

In the Web Console, you can add and remove network isolation exclusions in the policy properties (Application
settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum → Configure exclusions
link).




                                                          518
In the Exclusions window, you can click the buttons above the table to perform the following actions:

   Add information about the excluded network connection in one of the following ways:

      Click Add and enter information about the network connection

      Click Add from profile and select a network profile from the dictionary

   Delete information about a network connection by selecting the check box next to the network connection you
   want to delete and then clicking the Remove button.


Configuring exclusions from network isolation in device properties


  Adding or removing network isolation exclusions in the device properties is not available if a policy is applied to
  the device.


To add or remove a network isolation exclusion in the device properties:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the necessary device. To do so, click the link in the Current path
    field above the list of managed devices and select an administration group in the window that opens.
   The list displays only the managed devices for the selected administration group.

 3. Find your device in the list and click on its name.

 4. This opens a managed device properties window; in that window, go to the Applications tab.

 5. In the list of applications installed on the device, click Kaspersky Endpoint Security.
   The application properties window opens.

 6. In the application properties window that opens, on the Application settings tab, select Detection and
    Response and click the Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum link.

 7. This opens a window; in that window, under Exclusions, click the Configure exclusions link to open the
    Exclusions window.

 8. In the window that opens, use the buttons above the table to perform the necessary action:

      If you want to add information about an excluded network connection, do so in one of the following ways:

          Click the Add button and enter information about the network connection.

          Click the Add from profile button and select a network profile from the dictionary.

      If you want to delete information about an excluded network connection, select the check box next to the
      network connection that you want to delete and click Delete.

 9. Click the OK button to save the changes you have made.



                                                          519
The window for adding a network isolation exclusion
In this window, you can enter information about a network connection that you do not want to be blocked when
network isolation is enabled.

Network connection settings

        Setting                                                                      Description

  Name                  Field for entering the name of the network connection.

  Direction             In the drop-down list, you can select the direction of the network connection:
                               Outgoing.
                               Incoming.
                               Incoming / Outgoing.

  Protocol              In the drop-down list, you can select the protocol used by the network connection:
                               Any.
                               Custom.
                               ICMP.
                               IPv6_ICMP.
                               TCP.
                               UDP.
                               IGMP.
                               GRE.
                               IPv4.
                               IPv6.

  Number                Field for entering the network connection number.
                        This field is available if Custom is selected in the Protocol drop-down list.

  Local                 This check box adds the local port numbers or local port ranges that are listed in the field below to the list of network
  ports/ranges          isolation exclusions.

  Remote                This check box adds the remote port numbers or remote port ranges that are listed in the field below to the list of network
  ports/ranges          isolation exclusions.

  Remote address        This check box adds the IP address of the remote device specified in the field below to the list of network isolation exclusions.

  Applications          This check box adds the applications listed in the table below the check box to the list of network isolation exclusions.
                        You can add a path to an application whose network connection you do not want to block by clicking the Add button. In the
                        window that opens, enter the path to the application in the Path to application field and save the changes.
                        You can remove an application from the table by selecting the check box next to the application you want to remove and then
                        clicking the Remove button.


                              These settings apply to devices with kernel versions from 4.18 to 6.6 that support eBPF with BTF.




The Network profiles dictionary window
In this window, you can select one or more excluded network connection profiles.

Network connection profiles

        Network connection profile                                                             Description

  DNS server                                   The service providing DNS name resolution by responding to requests to get IP addresses and requests
                                               to update DNS records.

  DNS client                                   The service providing DNS name resolution by executing DNS name queries.

  Active Directory Certificate                 Services used to create, verify, and revoke public key certificates for internal use within the organization.
  Services




                                                                          520
       Network connection profile                                                    Description

  Active Directory Federation          Services used for granting users access to multiple web services or network resources through unified
  Services                             sets of credentials that are stored centrally.

  Active Directory Lightweight         Services that provide the same functionality as Active Directory Domain Services but do not require the
  Directory Services                   creation of domains or domain controllers.

  Active Directory Rights Management   Services used for controlling user access to documents.
  Services

  DHCP                                 The service uses Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) to automatically allocate IP addresses.

  File Transfer Protocol (FTP)         Standard network protocol for transferring files between a client and a server across a network.

  Kerberos Key Distribution Center     The network service used to provide tickets (TGS) and temporary session keys to users and devices in an
                                       Active Directory domain.

  Secure Shell (SSH)                   A protocol that allows remote control of an operating system and tunneling of TCP connections.

  Linux system components              Linux system components.




Managing the network isolation of a device on the command line
When integrated with Detection and Response solutions, on the command line, you can:

   Check the network isolation status of a device and view the list of network isolation exclusions.

   Disable network isolation of a device.

To disable network isolation for a device, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-R] --isolation-off


To check the network isolation status and view the list of network isolation exclusions, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-R] --isolation-stat


One of the following network isolation statuses is displayed:

   Network isolation enabled.

   Network isolation disabled.




Execution prevention for objects
If the blocking mode of file operation interception is not enabled, execution prevention for objects works in inform
mode, regardless of the configured operating mode. When integrated with Detection and Response solutions, as
part of a threat response action, Kaspersky Endpoint Security Nodes can control the execution of executable files
and scripts, as well as the opening of office application files on the device. Execution prevention for objects
supports a certain set of file extensions for office applications and a certain set of script interpreters. By blocking
the launch of objects, you can stop the spread of a threat.




                                                                 521
Object execution prevention is based on the execution prevention rules. An execution prevention rule is a set of
criteria that the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application takes into account when responding to the execution of
an object. The application blocks the execution of an object only if the object satisfies all criteria of an execution
prevention rule. The application identifies files by their path or MD5 or SHA256 checksum.

The execution prevention functionality is available in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application if one of the
following conditions is satisfied:

   Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
   component is enabled and the Kaspersky Anti Targeted Attack Platform solution is activated.

   Integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
   solution is enabled and the EDR Optimum component is activated.


  If the blocking mode of file operation interception is not enabled, execution prevention works in inform mode,
  regardless of the configured operating mode.


Execution prevention for objects is disabled by default.


  Enabling execution prevention for objects may affect the startup speed of applications in the operating
  system.


For object execution prevention to work, you need to enable execution prevention rules.


Special considerations for object execution prevention when integrated with Kaspersky
Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)

When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)
component, the application uses object execution prevention rules of the EDR (KATA) component. The application
gets these rules from Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA).

When integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component, you can:

   Enable or disable the application of object execution prevention rules of the EDR (KATA) component in the Web
   Console, the Administration Console, or on the command line.
   When execution prevention rules are triggered, Kaspersky Endpoint Security sends a report to Kaspersky Anti
   Targeted Attack Platform .

   View the list of object execution prevention rules of the EDR (KATA) component on the command line.


Special considerations for object execution prevention when integrated with Kaspersky
Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum

When Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum
solution, the application uses object execution prevention rules of the EDR Optimum component. You can create
these rules manually in the Web Console. You can also create execution prevention rules automatically in the alert
details window.




                                                         522
When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, you can:

   Enable or disable the application of object execution prevention rules of the EDR Optimum component in the
   Web Console or on the command line.

   Create and configure EDR Optimum execution prevention rules for objects in the Web Console.
   You can also automatically create an execution prevention rule for an object by preventing the execution of a
   file in the alert details window. The execution prevention rule is added to the policy for the administration group
   that the device belongs to.


     You can prevent the execution of files in the alert details window only if a policy is applied to the device.


   View the list of object execution prevention rules of the EDR Optimum component on the command line.

When integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum, object execution prevention can
work in one of two modes:

   Block. In this mode, the application blocks the execution of objects or the opening of documents that satisfy
   the criteria of the prevention rules, and logs an event about attempts to run objects or open documents.


     The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application blocks execution of a script that is prohibited by a run
     prevention rule, even if that script is imported by an allowed script.


   Inform. In this mode, the application logs an event about attempts to run executable objects or open
   documents that satisfy the criteria of the prevention rules, but does not actually block their execution or
   opening. This mode is selected by default.


Limitations of execution prevention for objects

The following limitations apply to object execution prevention rules:

   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application does not block objects specified in the execution prevention rules
   until the application is started.

   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application does not block files that are opened before a prevention rule is
   created or modified.

   The Kaspersky Endpoint Security application does not block objects covered by an execution prevention rule
   that were executed before the execution prevention rule was created or modified to cover these objects.

   Some files can be critically important for the operation of the operating system and the application. Preventing
   the execution of such files may disrupt the operation of the system.

   We do not recommend creating more than 50000 execution prevention rules because as this may lead to
   system instability.




                                                         523
Configuring execution prevention for objects in the Web Console

Configuring EDR (KATA) execution prevention for objects.

If integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Expert (on-premise) solution or the Kaspersky
Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) component is enabled, you can enable or disable execution prevention
for objects in the policy properties (Application settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and
Response (KATA)).

The Execution prevention toggle switch under Execution prevention enables or disables execution prevention
rules of the EDR (KATA) component.


Configuring EDR Optimum execution prevention for objects.

If integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum is enabled, you can enable or disable
object execution prevention and configure object execution prevention rules of the EDR Optimum component:

    In the policy properties (Application settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint Detection and
    Response Optimum)

    In the device properties (Assets (Devices) → Managed devices → <device name> link → Applications →
    <Kaspersky Endpoint Security application name> link → Application settings → Detection and Response →
    Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum)


  Object execution prevention cannot be enabled or disabled in the device properties if a policy is applied to the
  device.


Settings of EDR Optimum execution prevention for objects.

              Setting                                                                    Description

  Execution prevention for            Enables or disables EDR Optimum rules for execution prevention for objects.
  objects is enabled/disabled
                                      By default, rules are not applied.

  Action when starting or             You can select the mode of object execution prevention:
  opening an object                       Block. In this mode, the application blocks the execution of objects or the opening of documents that
                                          satisfy the criteria of the prevention rules, and logs an event about attempts to run objects or open
                                          documents in the event log.
                                          Inform. In this mode, the application logs an event about attempts to run executable objects or open
                                          documents that satisfy the criteria of the prevention rules in the event log, but does not actually block
                                          their execution or opening. This mode is selected by default.

  List of object execution            The Add link opens a window in which you can configure an object execution prevention rule of the EDR
  prevention rules.                   Optimum component.
                                      If necessary, you can remove a rule from the list by clicking the Delete button.


To add a rule to the list of object execution prevention rules of the EDR Optimum component:

  1. Click the Add button above the list of execution prevention rules.

 2. This opens a window; in that window, enter the name of the execution prevention rule.




                                                                           524
 3. Specify the status of the execution prevention rule by setting the switch to the appropriate position:

      Enabled means the rule is enabled, the application applies this rule.

      Disabled means the rule is disabled and is not used by the application.


     You can enable or disable the created rule at any time.


 4. In the Type drop-down list, select the type of object you want to block:

      Executable file.

      Script.

      Office application files.


     If you select the wrong object type, the application will be unable to block the file or script.


 5. To add an object, specify the path to the object and/or the checksum of the object.
   To specify a path to an object, select Use path and enter the path to the object.
   To specify an object checksum, select the SHA256 or MD5 option and enter the object checksum.

 6. Click OK.
   The created rule is added to the list of rules in the Execution prevention for objects settings block.



Configuring object execution prevention in the Administration
Console

  You can enable or disable object execution prevention in the Administration Console only when integrated
  with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA).


You can enable or disable object execution prevention in the policy properties (Application settings → Detection
and Response → Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA)).

The Enable execution prevention for objects check box under Execution prevention enables or disables
execution prevention rules of the EDR (KATA) component.



Managing execution prevention for objects on the command line
On the command line, you can start and stop the application of execution prevention rules for objects using the
following predefined tasks:

   Execution prevention for objects (EDR (KATA)) (KATAEDR_Prevention).

   Execution prevention for objects (EDR Optimum) (EDRO_Prevention).

                                                         525
By default, Execution prevention for objects (EDR (KATA)) (KATAEDR_Prevention) and Execution prevention for
objects (EDR Optimum) (EDRO_Prevention) tasks are not started. You can start and stop these tasks manually.


  You can run the Execution prevention for objects (EDR (KATA)) task only if integration with Kaspersky
  Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) is enabled. You can run the Execution prevention for objects (EDR
  Optimum) task only if integration with Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum is enabled.


You can use object execution prevention rule management commands to view the list of object execution
prevention rules of the EDR (KATA) and EDR Optimum components.

To view the list of EDR (KATA) object execution prevention rules, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-T] --get-prevention-state --kata


To view the list of EDR Optimum object execution prevention rules, run the following command:

  kesl-control [-T] --get-prevention-state --edro




Cloud Sandbox
The Cloud Sandbox technology allows detecting advanced threats on the device. The Kaspersky Endpoint
Security application automatically sends detected files to Cloud Sandbox for analysis. Cloud Sandbox runs these
files in an isolated environment to detect malicious activity and decides on the reputation of these files.
Information about these files is then sent to the Kaspersky Security Network. Thus, if Cloud Sandbox detects a
malicious file, Kaspersky Endpoint Security performs an action to eliminate the threat on all devices on which it
detects this file.


  For Cloud Sandbox to work, you need to enable the use of Kaspersky Security Network.



  If you are using Kaspersky Private Security Network, the Cloud Sandbox technology is not available.


The Cloud Sandbox technology is always enabled and is available to all users of Kaspersky Security Network,
regardless of the type of license under which you are using the application. If you have the Kaspersky Endpoint
Detection and Response Optimum solution deployed, you can enable a separate counter in the Web Console for
threats detected using Cloud Sandbox. A counter of threats detected by Cloud Sandbox is also displayed in the
GUI reports. You can use this counter to compile statistics when analyzing detected threats.

To enable the Cloud Sandbox counter in the Web Console:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Policies and policy profiles.
   The list of policies opens.

 2. Select the administration group containing the devices to which the policy is applied. To do so, click the link in
    the Current path field in the upper part of the window and in the opened window, select an administration
    group.
   The list displays the policies configured for the selected administration group.



                                                         526
 3. Click the name of the required policy in the list.
   The policy properties window opens.

 4. In the policy properties window, select Application settings → Detection and Response → Endpoint
    Detection and Response Optimum.

 5. Under Cloud Sandbox, enable the Cloud Sandbox toggle switch.

 6. Click OK.

 7. Click the Save button to save the changes made.




Integration with Kaspersky Managed Detection and
Response
The Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response service continuously searches for, detects, and eliminates
threats aimed at your organization. Integration with the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response solution is
facilitated by a Kaspersky Endpoint Security component: Managed Detection and Response (MDR).

When interacting with Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response, Kaspersky Endpoint Security can carry out
the following functions:

   Send telemetry data to Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response for threat detection.

   Execute Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response commands for providing security features.

To configure integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response,
perform the following actions:

   Make sure that File Threat Protection and Behavior Detection are enabled. If these components are disabled,
   the device will have a red status in Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response.
   We also recommend enabling Web Threat Protection and Network Threat Protection. If these components are
   disabled, the device will have a yellow status in Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response.
   See the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response Help        for more information about device statuses.

   Enable the use of Kaspersky Security Network in the extended mode.
   You can enable Kaspersky Security Network in the command line, in the Web Console, or in the Administration
   Console.

   Upload the KPSN configuration file from the archive of the MDR configuration file to the Administration Server.
   The KPSN configuration file is required for sending telemetry.
   You can upload the KPSN configuration file only in the Web Console or the Administration Console.


     Uploading a KPSN configuration file using Kaspersky Endpoint Security commands is not possible.


   Enable the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response component and upload a BLOB configuration file,
   which is located in the ZIP archive of the MDR configuration file.
   You can enable the Managed Detection and Response component and upload the BLOB configuration file in
   the command line, in the Web Console, or in the Administration Console.

                                                         527
Configuring KPSN to enable Kaspersky Managed Detection and
Response integration
You can upload the KPSN configuration file to the Administration Console only in the Web Console or the
Administration Console.

The KPSN configuration file (with the .pkcs7 extension) is located in the ZIP archive of the MDR configuration file.


  By uploading the KPSN configuration file, you agree that data from the device where Kaspersky Endpoint
  Security is installed will be automatically sent to Kaspersky for processing. Do not load the configuration file if
  you do not agree that the transmitted data will be processed. For detailed description of the transmitted
  data, refer to Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response documentation.


To upload the KPSN configuration file using the Web Console:

 1. In the main Web Console window, open the Administration Server properties window.

 2. In the list on the left, select the KSN proxy server settings section.

 3. Turn on the Enable KSN proxy server on the Administration Server as a proxy server toggle switch to enable
    the KSN proxy server service.

 4. Turn on the Use Kaspersky Private Security Network toggle switch.

 5. In the window that opens and displays a warning about the specific aspects of using the KSN proxy server on
    the distribution points with the previous version of the Network Agent installed, click OK.

 6. Click the File with KSN proxy server settings button.

 7. Select the Kaspersky Security Network configuration file (file with the .pkcs7 extension) and click the Open
    button.

 8. Click Save.

To upload the KPSN configuration file using the Administration Console:

 1. In the Administration Console tree, open the Administration Server properties window.

 2. Select KSN proxy server → KSN proxy server settings.

 3. Select the Use Administration Server as a proxy server check box to enable the KSN proxy server service.

 4. Select the Configure Private KSN check box.

 5. In the window that opens and displays a warning about the specific aspects of using the KSN proxy server on
    the distribution points with the previous version of the Network Agent installed, click OK.

 6. Click the File with KSN proxy server settings button.




                                                         528
 7. Select the Kaspersky Security Network configuration file (file with the .pkcs7 extension) and click the Open
    button.

 8. Click Apply.



Configuring the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response
integration in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can enable or disable the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with Kaspersky
Managed Detection and Response and load a BLOB file in the policy properties (Application settings →
Detection and Response → Managed Detection and Response).

MDR integration settings

              Setting                                                                Description

  Managed Detection and             The toggle switch enables or disables the Managed Detection and Response component, which is necessary
  Response enabled / disabled       for integrating Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response solution.
                                    The toggle button is switched off by default.

  Download                          Clicking this button opens a standard window in which you can select a BLOB file to upload.


The BLOB file can be found inside the ZIP archive of the MDR configuration file included in the Kaspersky Managed
Detection and Response distribution kit.


  By uploading the BLOB file, you agree that data from the device where Kaspersky Endpoint Security is
  installed will be automatically sent to Kaspersky for processing. Do not upload the file if you do not agree to
  the processing of transmitted data. For detailed description of the transmitted data, refer to Kaspersky
  Managed Detection and Response help section.




Configuring the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response
integration in the Administration Console
In the Administration Console, you can enable or disable the integration of Kaspersky Endpoint Security with
Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response and load a BLOB file in the policy properties (Detection and
Response → Managed Detection and Response).

MDR integration settings

             Setting                                                                Description

  Enable Managed Detection      The check box enables the Managed Detection and Response component, which is necessary for integrating
  and Response                  Kaspersky Endpoint Security with the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response solution.
                                This check box is cleared by default.

  Download                      Clicking this button opens a standard Microsoft Windows window in which you can select a BLOB file to upload.




                                                                        529
The BLOB file can be found inside the ZIP archive of the MDR configuration file included in the Kaspersky Managed
Detection and Response distribution kit.


  By uploading the BLOB file, you agree that data from the device where Kaspersky Endpoint Security is
  installed will be automatically sent to Kaspersky for processing. Do not upload the file if you do not agree to
  the processing of transmitted data. For detailed description of the transmitted data, refer to Kaspersky
  Managed Detection and Response help section.




Configuring the Kaspersky Managed Detection and Response
integration on the command line
In the command line, you can do the following:

   Enable or disable the Managed Detection and Response component.

   Upload or delete the BLOB file required for the integration.

   Edit the start time of the Mdr_Autostart_Scan service task created automatically after Kaspersky Endpoint
   Security successfully integrates with Managed Detection and Response.


  We recommend configuring the integration between Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Managed
  Detection and Response in the Administration Console or in the Web Console.


You can enable or disable the Managed Detection and Response component using the UseMDR parameter in the
general application settings. You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains
all general application settings.

UseMDR accepts the following values:

   Yes to enable the Managed Detection and Response component.

   No to disable the Managed Detection and Response component.

You can upload or delete the BLOB file using the license key management commands. You can find the BLOB file in
the ZIP archive of the MDR configuration file.

To upload the BLOB file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --load-mdr-blob < path to the MDR BLOB file>


To remove the BLOB file, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --remove-mdr-blob


Enabling the integration creates a Mdr_Autostart_Scan service task that runs once per day. You can set the start
time if needed. No other task settings or schedule options can be edited.




                                                        530
Configuring settings for using the application
in Light Agent mode

  The settings described in this section apply only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode
  for protecting virtual environments.


Running Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode requires constant interaction between the Light Agent
and the Protection Server installed on the SVM. If there is no connection to the Protection Server, the Light Agent
cannot transfer file fragments to the Protection Server for scanning, and scanning is not performed.

To interact with the Protection Server, the Light Agent establishes and maintains a connection to the SVM on
which this Protection Server is installed.

You can configure the settings for connecting Light Agent to SVMs in the Web Console or Administration
Console. You cannot configure the settings in the command line; you can only view information about application
usage in Light Agent mode.

You can configure the following settings for connecting the Light Agent to the SVM:

   SVM detection method. You can select a method that Light Agents will use to discover SVMs available to
   connect to. The Light Agent can discover SVMs running on the network in one of the following ways:

      Using the Integration Server. SVMs transmit information about themselves to the Integration Server. The
      Integration Server generates a list of SVMs available for connection and provides it to Light Agents.
      To use this method of detecting SVMs, you need to connect SVMs and Light Agents to the Integration
      Server.

      Using a list of SVM addresses. You can specify a list of SVM addresses to which Light Agents can connect.

   Algorithm for selecting SVMs to connect to. After receiving information about available SVMs, the Light Agent
   selects the optimal SVM to connect to in accordance with the SVM selection algorithm. You can specify which
   algorithm Light Agents should use when selecting an SVM to connect to.

   Connection tags. You can use connection tags to control Light Agents' connection to SVMs. If you use
   connection tags, Light Agent can only connect to SVMs that are configured to use that connection tag.

   Security of the connection between the Light Agent and the Protection Server. You can use encryption to
   protect the connection between Light Agents and Protection Servers.

For more information about the settings for connecting the Light Agent to the SVM, refer to the Help for
Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent .




Configuring Light Agent settings in the Web Console
In the Web Console, you can configure settings for connecting Light Agent to SVMs in the policy properties
(Application settings → Light Agent mode).



                                                       531
SVM discovery settings

  The settings described in this section apply only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode
  for protecting virtual environments.


In this window, you can select the method that Light Agents use to discover SVMs available to connect to.

SVM discovery settings

           Setting                                                              Description

  Use the Integration     If this option is selected, Light Agent connects to Integration Server to get a list of SVMs available for connection and
  Server                  their details.


                             If you want to use the Integration Server, you need to configure the connection of Light Agents to the
                             Integration Server.




  Use a custom list of    If this option is selected, you can specify a list of SVMs that Light Agents managed by this policy can connect to. Light
  SVM addresses           agents will only connect to SVMs specified in the list.

  List of SVM addresses   The list of IP addresses in IPv4 format or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) of the SVMs to which Light Agents
                          covered by the policy can connect.
                          Click Add to open a window in which you can specify the IP address in IPv4 format or the fully qualified domain name
                          (FQDN) of the SVM. You can enter multiple IP addresses or FQDNs of SVMs on a new line.



                             Specify only fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) that map to a single IP address. Using a fully qualified domain
                             name that corresponds to multiple IP addresses can lead to errors in the application.


                          You can delete addresses selected in the list by clicking the Delete button.
                          The list of SVM addresses is displayed if the Use a custom list of SVM addresses option is selected.




  If you select the Use a custom list of SVM addresses option, the Light Agent is using the extended SVM
  selection algorithm, and large infrastructure protection mode is enabled on an SVM (for more information, see
  the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help ), then connecting a Light Agent to this SVM is
  only possible if the SVM path is ignored. In the SVM selection algorithm section, you need to set the SVM
  path setting to Ignore. If any other value is set, Light Agents will not be able to connect to the SVM.




Integration Server connection settings

  The settings described in this section apply only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode
  for protecting virtual environments.


A connection to the Integration Server is required if you want Light Agents to receive information about the SVM
through the Integration Server, or if you want to protect the connection between the Protection Server and the
Light Agent.

This window displays the current settings for connecting Light Agents to the Integration Server: address and port
for connecting. The Edit button opens the Connection to the Integration Server window, where you can
configure the connection to the Integration Server.
                                                                   532
Connection to the Integration Server window
In this window, you can specify or change the settings for connecting Light Agents to the Integration Server.

Integration Server connection settings

         Setting                                                                    Description

  Address                 IP address in IPv4 format or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the device on which the Integration Server is installed.



                             If a NetBIOS name, "localhost", or 127.0.0.1 is specified as the address, the connection to the Integration Server fails
                             with an error.



  Port                    Port for connecting to the Integration Server.
                          Port 7271 is used by default.

  Check                   When you click the button, the web plug-in checks the SSL certificate received from the Integration Server.
                          The button is available after entering the address and port for connecting to the Integration Server.
                          If the certificate contains an error or is not trusted, a corresponding message is displayed in the Connection to the
                          Integration Server window.

  View the received       Click the line to view information about the certificate received from the Integration Server.
  certificate

  Ignore                  Select this option to save the received certificate and continue connecting to the Integration Server.



                             If you encounter problems with an SSL certificate, we recommend to make sure that the data transmission channel
                             you are using is secure.



  Cancel                  Select this option to terminate the connection to the Integration Server.

  Password                Password for the Integration Server administrator account (admin account password).


                             It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms ensure that the
                             password cannot be guessed within 6 months.




  Check                   Clicking the button connects the web plug-in to the Integration Server.
                          After connecting to the Integration Server with administrator rights, the policy automatically receives the password of the
                          agent account, which is used to connect Light Agents to the Integration Server. The password is stored in encrypted form.




SVM connection tag
In this window, you can enable the Light Agent to use tags and assign a tag that the Light Agent will use to
connect.


  Make sure that the use of connection tags is also configured in the Protection Server settings: For more
  information, see the Help for Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent . Light Agents assigned a tag
  can only connect to SVMs that are allowed to connect to Light Agents with that tag.




                                                                           533
Settings for using connection tags

         Setting                                                               Description

  Use connection tag       The check box enables or disables the use of SVM connection tags by the Light Agent.

  Tag
                           A tag that is assigned to Light Agents.
                           You can enter a text string of up to 255 characters as a tag. You can use any character except the ; character.
                           The field is available if the Use connection tag check box is selected.




SVM selection algorithm
In this window, you can specify which SVM selection algorithm Light Agents for Linux should use, and configure the
settings for using the extended SVM selection algorithm.

SVM selection algorithm

         Setting                                                                     Description

  Use the standard         If this option is selected, after installing and running on a virtual machine, the Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to
  SVM selection            that is local to Light Agent. For more details, refer to the Help for Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light
  algorithm                Agent .
                           If there are no local SVMs available for connection, the Light Agent selects the SVM that has the fewest Light Agents
                           connected, regardless of the location of the SVM in the virtual infrastructure.
                           This option is selected by default.

  Use the extended         If this option is selected, you can use the SVM path slider to specify how the SVM's location in the virtual infrastructure
  SVM selection            will be taken into account when determining whether the SVM is local relative to the Light Agent. The Light Agent will only
  algorithm                be able to connect to SVMs that are local.
                           You can also specify that the SVM path in the virtual infrastructure should not be taken into account when selecting an
                           SVM to connect to.
                           When selecting an SVM, Light Agents consider the number of Light Agents connected to the SVM to ensure an even
                           distribution of Light Agents among the SVMs available to connect to.




                                                                         534
       Setting                                                               Description

  SVM path           Allows you to specify the type of SVM path in the virtual infrastructure, which is taken into account when selecting SVMs
                     for connection:
                         Hypervisor. The Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to that meets the criteria (depending on the type of virtual
                         infrastructure):

                             The SVM is deployed on the same hypervisor as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                             infrastructure on the Microsoft Hyper-V platform, XenServer, VMware vSphere, KVM, Proxmox VE, Basis, Skala-R,
                             HUAWEI FusionSphere, Nutanix Acropolis, ALT Virtualization Server, Astra Linux or Numa vServer).
                             The SVM is located in the same Server Group as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                             infrastructure managed by the OpenStack platform, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), or the TIONIX Cloud Platform).

                         If there are no SVMs available for connection on the same hypervisor or in the same Server Group where the virtual
                         machine with the Light Agent is located, the Light Agent does not connect to the SVM.
                         Cluster. The Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to that meets the criteria (depending on the type of virtual
                         infrastructure):

                             The SVM is deployed in the same hypervisor cluster as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a
                             virtual infrastructure on the Microsoft Hyper-V platform, XenServer, VMware vSphere, KVM, Proxmox VE, Basis,
                             Skala-R, HUAWEI FusionSphere, Nutanix Acropolis, ALT Virtualization Server, Astra Linux or Numa vServer).
                             The SVM is deployed in the same OpenStack project as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a
                             virtual infrastructure managed by the OpenStack platform, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), or the TIONIX Cloud
                             Platform).

                         If there are no SVMs available for connection in the same hypervisor cluster or within the same OpenStack project
                         where the virtual machine with the Light Agent is located, the Light Agent does not connect to the SVM.
                         Data center. The Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to that meets the criteria (depending on the type of virtual
                         infrastructure):

                             The SVM is deployed in the same data center as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                             infrastructure on the Microsoft Hyper-V platform, XenServer, VMware vSphere, KVM, Proxmox VE, Basis, Skala-R,
                             HUAWEI FusionSphere, Nutanix Acropolis, ALT Virtualization Server, Astra Linux or Numa vServer).
                             The SVM is located in the same Availability Zone as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                             infrastructure managed by the OpenStack platform, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), or the TIONIX Cloud Platform).

                         If there are no SVMs available for connection in the same data center or Availability Zone where the virtual machine
                         with the Light Agent is located, the Light Agent does not connect to the SVM.
                         Ignore. When selecting an SVM, the Light Agent does not consider its location.
                     The Hypervisor option is selected by default.
                     The option is available if the Use the extended SVM selection algorithm option is selected.




  If a Light Agent uses the extended SVM selection algorithm and a list of SVM addresses is selected as the
  SVM discovery method, and large infrastructure protection mode is enabled on an SVM (for more information,
  see the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help ), then connecting a Light Agent to this SVM
  is only possible if the SVM path is ignored. You must set the SVM path setting to Ignore. If any other value is
  set, Light Agents will not be able to connect to the SVM.




Protecting the connection
In this window, you can enable encryption of the data transmission channel between the Light Agent and the
Protection Server


  Make sure that encryption of the data transmission channel between the Light Agent and the Protection
  Server is enabled in the Protection Server settings on the SVM. For more details, refer to the Help for
  Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent .




                                                                 535
Connection protection settings

             Setting                                                                      Description

  Encrypt data channel             Use encryption to protect the connection between Light Agents and Protection Servers.
  between Light Agent and
                                   If the check box is selected, an encrypted connection is established between the Light Agent, which is managed by
  the Protection Server            policy, and the Protection Server on the SVM that the Light Agent is connecting to. A Light Agent for which
                                   connection protection is enabled can only connect to an SVM on which connection protection is enabled or an
                                   unprotected connection to the Protection Server is allowed.
                                   If the check box is cleared, an unprotected connection is established between the Light Agent and the Protection
                                   Server on the SVM that the Light Agent is connecting to.
                                   This check box is cleared by default.




Configuring Light Agent settings in the Administration
Console
In the Administration Console, you can configure settings for connecting Light Agent to SVMs in the policy
properties (Light Agent mode).




Connection to the Integration Server

  The settings described in this section apply only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode
  for protecting virtual environments.


A connection to the Integration Server is required if you want Light Agents to receive information about the SVM
through the Integration Server, or if you want to protect the connection between the Protection Server and the
Light Agent.

This window displays the current settings for connecting Light Agents to the Integration Server: address and port
for connecting. The Edit button opens the Connection to the Integration Server window, where you can
configure the connection to the Integration Server.



Connection to the Integration Server window
In this window, you can specify or change the settings for connecting Light Agents to the Integration Server.

Integration Server connection settings

   Setting                                                                       Description

  Address      IP address in IPv4 format or fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of the device on which the Integration Server is installed.
               If the device on which Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed is part of a domain, the field indicates the domain
               name of this device by default.
               If the device on which the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed is not part of a domain or the Integration
               Server is installed on another device, the field must be filled in manually.



                  If a NetBIOS name, "localhost", or 127.0.0.1 is specified as the address, the connection to the Integration Server fails with an error.




  Port         Port for connecting to the Integration Server.
               Port 7271 is used by default.

                                                                           536
Verify Integration Server certificate window
This window appears if the SSL certificate received from the Integration Server contains an error or is not trusted.

You can click the link in the window to view the details of the received certificate.


  If you encounter problems with an SSL certificate, we recommend to make sure that the data transmission
  channel you are using is secure.


To continue connecting to the Integration Server, click the Ignore button. The received certificate will be installed
as a trusted certificate on the device where the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console is installed.



Authentication on the Integration Server window
This window appears if the device hosting the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Console does not belong
to a domain or your account does not belong to the KLAdmins local or domain group or to the local administrator
group.

Specify the password of the Integration Server administrator (password of the admin account) and click the OK
button.


  It is recommended to make sure that the password complexity and anti-bruteforce mechanisms ensure that
  the password cannot be guessed within 6 months.


After connecting to the Integration Server with administrator rights, the policy automatically receives the
password of the agent account, which is used to connect Light Agents to the Integration Server.



SVM discovery settings

  The settings described in this section apply only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode
  for protecting virtual environments.


In this window, you can select the method that Light Agents use to discover SVMs available to connect to.

SVM discovery settings

           Setting                                                              Description

  Use the Integration     If this option is selected, Light Agent connects to Integration Server to get a list of SVMs available for connection and
  Server                  their details.


                             If you want to use the Integration Server, you need to configure the settings for connecting Light Agents to the
                             Integration Server.




  Use a custom list of    If this option is selected, you can specify a list of SVMs that Light Agents managed by this policy can connect to. Light
  SVM addresses           agents will only connect to SVMs specified in the list.


                                                                   537
           Setting                                                                      Description

  List of SVMs                  A list of IP addresses in IPv4 format or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) of the SVMs to which Light Agents
                                managed by the policy can connect.
                                Click Add to open a window in which you can specify the IP address in IPv4 format or the fully qualified domain name
                                (FQDN) of the SVM. You can enter multiple IP addresses or FQDNs of SVMs on a new line.



                                     Specify only fully qualified domain names (FQDNs) that map to a single IP address. Using a fully qualified domain
                                     name that corresponds to multiple IP addresses can lead to errors in the application.


                                You can delete addresses selected in the list by clicking the Delete button.
                                The list of SVM addresses is displayed if the Use a custom list of SVM addresses option is selected.




  If you select the Use a custom list of SVM addresses option, the Light Agent is using the extended SVM
  selection algorithm, and large infrastructure protection mode is enabled on an SVM (for more information, see
  the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help ), then connecting a Light Agent to this SVM is
  only possible if the SVM path is ignored. In the SVM selection algorithm section, you need to set the SVM
  path setting to Ignore. If any other value is set, Light Agents will not be able to connect to the SVM.




SVM connection tag
In this window, you can enable the Light Agent to use tags and assign a tag that the Light Agent will use to
connect.


  Make sure that the use of connection tags is also configured in the Protection Server settings: For more
  information, see the Help for Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent . Light Agents assigned a tag
  can only connect to SVMs that are allowed to connect to Light Agents with that tag.


Settings for using connection tags

         Setting                                                                Description

  Use connection tag       The check box enables or disables the use of SVM connection tags by the Light Agent.

  Tag                      A tag that is assigned to Light Agents.
                           You can enter a text string of up to 255 characters as a tag. You can use any character except the ; character.
                           The field is available if the Use connection tag check box is selected.




SVM selection algorithm
In this window, you can specify which SVM selection algorithm Light Agents for Linux should use, and configure the
settings for using the extended SVM selection algorithm.

SVM selection algorithm

         Setting                                                                      Description

  Use the standard         If this option is selected, after installing and running on a virtual machine, the Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to
  SVM selection            that is local to Light Agent. For more details, refer to the Help for Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light
  algorithm                Agent .
                           If there are no local SVMs available for connection, the Light Agent selects the SVM that has the fewest Light Agents
                           connected, regardless of the location of the SVM in the virtual infrastructure.
                           This option is selected by default.


                                                                          538
     Setting                                                               Description

Use the extended
                   If this option is selected, you can use the SVM path slider to specify how the SVM's location in the virtual infrastructure
SVM selection      will be taken into account when determining whether the SVM is local relative to the Light Agent. The Light Agent will only
algorithm          be able to connect to SVMs that are local.
                   You can also specify that the SVM path in the virtual infrastructure should not be taken into account when selecting an
                   SVM to connect to.
                   When selecting an SVM, Light Agents consider the number of Light Agents connected to the SVM to ensure an even
                   distribution of Light Agents among the SVMs available to connect to.

SVM path           Allows you to specify the type of SVM path in the virtual infrastructure, which is taken into account when selecting SVMs
                   for connection:
                       Hypervisor. The Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to that meets the criteria (depending on the type of virtual
                       infrastructure):

                           The SVM is deployed on the same hypervisor as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                           infrastructure on the Microsoft Hyper-V platform, XenServer, VMware vSphere, KVM, Proxmox VE, Basis, Skala-R,
                           HUAWEI FusionSphere, Nutanix Acropolis, ALT Virtualization Server, Astra Linux or Numa vServer).
                           The SVM is located in the same Server Group as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                           infrastructure managed by the OpenStack platform, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), or the TIONIX Cloud Platform).

                       If there are no SVMs available for connection on the same hypervisor or in the same Server Group where the virtual
                       machine with the Light Agent is located, the Light Agent does not connect to the SVM.
                       Cluster. The Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to that meets the criteria (depending on the type of virtual
                       infrastructure):

                           The SVM is deployed in the same hypervisor cluster as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a
                           virtual infrastructure on the Microsoft Hyper-V platform, XenServer, VMware vSphere, KVM, Proxmox VE, Basis,
                           Skala-R, HUAWEI FusionSphere, Nutanix Acropolis, ALT Virtualization Server, Astra Linux or Numa vServer).
                           The SVM is deployed in the same OpenStack project as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a
                           virtual infrastructure managed by the OpenStack platform, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), or the TIONIX Cloud
                           Platform).

                       If there are no SVMs available for connection in the same hypervisor cluster or within the same OpenStack project
                       where the virtual machine with the Light Agent is located, the Light Agent does not connect to the SVM.
                       Data center. The Light Agent selects an SVM to connect to that meets the criteria (depending on the type of virtual
                       infrastructure):

                           The SVM is deployed in the same data center as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                           infrastructure on the Microsoft Hyper-V platform, XenServer, VMware vSphere, KVM, Proxmox VE, Basis, Skala-R,
                           HUAWEI FusionSphere, Nutanix Acropolis, ALT Virtualization Server, Astra Linux or Numa vServer).
                           The SVM is located in the same Availability Zone as the virtual machine with the Light Agent installed (in a virtual
                           infrastructure managed by the OpenStack platform, VK Cloud (VK Private Cloud), or the TIONIX Cloud Platform).

                       If there are no SVMs available for connection in the same data center or Availability Zone where the virtual machine
                       with the Light Agent is located, the Light Agent does not connect to the SVM.
                       Ignore. When selecting an SVM, the Light Agent does not consider its location.
                   The Hypervisor option is selected by default.
                   The option is available if the Use the extended SVM selection algorithm option is selected.




If a Light Agent uses the extended SVM selection algorithm and a list of SVM addresses is selected as the
SVM discovery method, and large infrastructure protection mode is enabled on an SVM (for more information,
see the Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help ), then connecting a Light Agent to this SVM
is only possible if the SVM path is ignored. You must set the SVM path setting to Ignore. If any other value is
set, Light Agents will not be able to connect to the SVM.




                                                                539
Protecting the connection
In this window, you can enable encryption of the data transmission channel between the Light Agent and the
Protection Server


  Make sure that encryption of the data transmission channel between the Light Agent and the Protection
  Server is enabled in the Protection Server settings on the SVM. For more details, refer to the Help for
  Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud Security for Virtualization Light Agent .


Connection protection settings

            Setting                                                                 Description

  Encrypt data channel           Use encryption to protect the connection between Light Agents and Protection Servers.
  between Light Agent and        If the check box is selected, an encrypted connection is established between the Light Agent, which is managed by
  the Protection Server          policy, and the Protection Server on the SVM that the Light Agent is connecting to. A Light Agent for which
                                 connection protection is enabled can only connect to an SVM on which connection protection is enabled or an
                                 unprotected connection to the Protection Server is allowed.
                                 If the check box is cleared, an unprotected connection is established between the Light Agent and the Protection
                                 Server on the SVM that the Light Agent is connecting to.
                                 This check box is cleared by default.




Viewing information about application usage in Light
Agent mode in the command line
In the command line, you can view the following information about using the application in Light Agent mode for
protecting virtual environments:

    Settings for using the application in Light Agent mode

    Connecting the Light Agent to the Integration Server

    Connecting the Light Agent to SVMs

To view information about the settings for using the application in Light Agent mode, run:

   kesl-control [-V] --ksvla-info


The command outputs the following information to the console:

    Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments: enabled/disabled.
    If Light Agent mode is enabled, the application is used as a Light Agent as part of Kaspersky Hybrid Cloud
    Security for Virtualization Light Agent.




                                                                         540
   VDI protection mode: enabled/disabled.
   VDI protection mode optimizes the Kaspersky Endpoint Security for running on temporary virtual machines. If
   VDI protection mode is enabled, updates that require restarting the protected virtual machine are not installed
   on temporary virtual machines. When receiving updates that require a restart, the Light Agent installed on a
   temporary virtual machine sends a message to Kaspersky Security Center about the need to update the
   protected virtual machine template.

   Type of protected virtual machine: temporary or persistent.

   The role of the protected virtual machine in the virtual infrastructure: server or workstation.

   The identifier (UUID) of the protected virtual machine.

To view information about connecting Light Agent to the Integration Server, run:

  kesl-control [-V] --viis-info


The command outputs the following information to the console:

   Address and port of the Integration Server that the Light Agent connects to.

   Status of the connection to the Integration Server.

   Date and time of the last connection between the Light Agent and the Integration Server.

To view information about connecting Light Agent to SVMs, run:

  kesl-control [-V] --svm-info


The command outputs the following information to the console:

   The address of the SVM to which the Light Agent is connected, and the location of the SVM in the virtual
   infrastructure relative to the Light Agent: local or not local.

   Method that the Light Agent uses to detect SVMs: using the Integration Server or using a list of manually
   defined SVM addresses.

   List of SVM addresses, if the selected SVM discovery method is lists of SVM addresses.

   Tag for connecting Light Agent to the SVM.

   SVM selection algorithm: standard or advanced. If the extended SVM selection algorithm is used, the type of
   the SVM's location in the virtual infrastructure is also displayed.

   Protection of the connection between the Light Agent and the Protection Server.

For information about the settings for connecting Light Agents to the Integration Server and SVMs, refer to the
Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent Help .




                                                         541
Viewing events and reports
While the application is running, various events can occur. The events may be informational or may contain
important data. For example, the application can use an event to inform about a successful application database
update, or about an error of application components that needs to be fixed.

Kaspersky Endpoint Security saves information about application events to the following logs:

   The application event log. By default, the application saves information about events to the database at
   /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/storage/events.db. You can configure the application event log in the
   command line.

   Operating system log (syslog). The operating system log is not used by default. You can enable saving events to
   this log.


  Access to the application event log and operating system log requires root privileges.


If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is managed by Kaspersky Security Center, information about events may be
transmitted to the Kaspersky Security Center Administration Server. Aggregation rules apply to certain events. If a
large number of same-type events are created within a short period of time while the application is running, the
application will switch to event aggregation mode and send to Kaspersky Security Center one aggregated event
with a description of the events settings. Different aggregation rules may be used for different events. For more
information about events, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help.

You can receive information about application events in the following ways:

   In the Administration Console and in the Web Console

   In the command line

   When using the application's graphical user interface – in pop-up notifications if displaying notifications is
   enabled in the policy properties or in the application's general settings

The application can generate various types of reports on the events that occur while the application is running.
Reports contain information about the operation of each Kaspersky Endpoint Security component, the results of
each task, and the overall operation of the application.

You can view reports in the following ways:

   Kaspersky Security Center reports are available in the Administration Console and in the Web Console. You can
   use these to get information about infected files or usage of keys and application databases, among other
   things. For detailed information on working with Kaspersky Security Center reports, please refer to the
   Kaspersky Security Center Help.

   The graphical user interface of Kaspersky Endpoint Security displays reports of the application, its
   components and tasks.




                                                        542
Contents of reports and events

Events and reports may contain the following personal data:

   User name and user ID of operating system users

   Paths to user files

   IP addresses of remote devices that are scanned by the Anti-Cryptor component

   IP addresses of senders and receivers of network packets scanned by the Firewall Management component

   Web addresses of the update sources

   General application settings values

   Names and settings of command line tasks

   Detected malicious, phishing, adware web addresses, and web addresses containing legitimate applications that
   intruders can use to compromise devices or data

   Names of the containers and images

   Paths to the containers and images

   Names and IDs of the devices

   Names of application categories

   Web addresses of the repositories

   File names, paths, and hashes of executable files of applications


Rules of escaping characters in file paths

Some events may contain file paths. For output, the file path is treated as a UTF-8 string. If any of the bytes in the
path does not comply with the UTF-8 encoding rules, is it replaced with the ? character. Any four-byte sequence
that encodes a character code outside the Unicode range (greater than 0x10FFFF) is also replaced with the ?
character. Special characters are escaped (replaced) in a certain way.

The following rules apply for escaping characters in file paths inside events in the output of kesl-control -E --
query:

   '\a', '\b', '\t', '\n', '\v', '\f', '\r' characters are replaced by two characters as follows:
   '\a' -> "\\a"
   '\b' -> "\\b"
   '\t' -> "\\t"
   '\n' -> "\\n"
   '\v' -> "\\v"
   '\f' -> "\\f"



                                                                543
   '\r' -> "\\r"

   All other special characters are output without modification.

The following rules apply for escaping characters in file paths inside events in the output of kesl-control -E --
query --json:

   In accordance with the JSON format, the '\b', '\f', '\n', '\r', '\t', '"', '\\' characters are escaped as follows:
   '\b' -> "\\b"
   '\f' -> "\\f"
   '\n' -> "\\n"
   '\r' -> "\\r"
   '\t' -> "\\t"
   '"' -> "\\\""
   '\\' -> "\\\\"

   All other special characters are escaped in accordance with the general JSON rules for escaping special
   characters ('\a' -> '\u0007').

Rules for escaping characters in file paths in events when sending to syslog:

   In accordance with the JSON format, the '\b', '\f', '\n', '\r', '\t', '"', '\\' characters are escaped as follows:
   '\b' -> "\\b"
   '\f' -> "\\f"
   '\n' -> "\\n"
   '\r' -> "\\r"
   '\t' -> "\\t"
   '"' -> "\\\""
   '\\' -> "\\\\"

   All other special characters are escaped in accordance with the general JSON rules for escaping special
   characters ('\a' -> '\u0007').

The first backslash in the sequence when describing rules is the escape character.

  Examples:
  '\a' is one character (a control character).

  '\\a' is two characters (backslash + the a character).

  '\\' is one character (backslash), '\\\\' is two characters (backslash + backslash).




Configuring event logging to the operating system log
Events that occur during the operation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security can be recorded in the operating system
log. You can enable or disable the recording of events in this log using the Web Console, Administration Console, or
the command line.

If you use the command line to manage the application, the recording of events in the operating system log is
disabled by default.
                                                                       544
If you use the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application in standard mode and manage the application using
Kaspersky Security Center, information about adding and removing license keys and about the license term
expiring is recorded in the default operating system log. You can select the events that you want to be recorded in
the operating system log in the properties of the policy that is applied to the application.


Configuring in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can configure logging events to the operating system log in the policy properties
(Application settings → General settings → Application settings).

Clicking the Configure notifications link in the Notifications section opens the Notifications window. In this
window, you can use the check boxes to select the events that the application records in the operating system log.

You can select individual event types or all event types with a certain severity level.


Configuring in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure logging events to the operating system log in the policy
properties (General settings → Application settings).

Clicking Configure under Notifications opens the Notification settings window. In this window, you can use the
check boxes to select the events that the application records in the operating system log.

You can select individual event types or all event types with a certain severity level.


Configuring in the command line

You can enable or disable saving events to the operating system log in the command line via the UseSyslog option
in the general application settings.

You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

UseSyslog accepts the following values:

   Yes: enable saving events to syslog.

   No (default): disable saving events to syslog.




Configuring application event log settings
By default, information about events is saved to the application event log located on the device. You can define
the following application event log options in the command line via the general application settings:

   Change the path to the application event log database via the EventsStoragePath option. Default value:
   /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/storage/events.db.

   Specify the maximum number of events to be stored by the application via the MaxEventsNumber option.
   Default value: 500000. When the specified number of events is exceeded, the application deletes the oldest
   events.
                                                         545
You can change the values of the settings with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that
contains all general application settings.




Viewing events in Kaspersky Security Center
A list of all Kaspersky Endpoint Security events is displayed in the Web Console and in the Administration Console.

Events of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application fall into the following types by severity:

   Critical events pose a serious threat to the device's security (detection of malicious objects, vulnerabilities,
   problems with the operation of the application). Critical events require your immediate attention. We
   recommend not to disable critical event notifications.

   Functional failures occur when the application fails (processing error, task misconfiguration). Such events do
   not pose a direct threat to the security of the device, but they require your actions for the application to work
   correctly.

   Warnings do not require your immediate action, but may indicate a potential future threat to the security of the
   device.

   Informational messages correspond to events of an informational nature.

You can configure event notifications. A notification is a message containing information about an event that
occurred on a protected device. Notifications give you timely information about application events. You can
configure the execution of a script upon receiving events from the application or upon receiving notifications
about events by e-mail.

For detailed information about using Kaspersky Security Center notifications, refer to the Kaspersky Security
Center Help.




Viewing events in the command line
In the command line, you can view:

   Current application events

   Events in the application event log


Displaying current events

You can output information about all current application events or about current events associated with starting
or stopping a specified task. You can use the filter to output certain current events, for example, events of a
specified type.

To output information about all current application events, run:

  kesl-control -W


The command returns the name of the event and additional information about the event.

                                                         546
To output only information about current events associated with a running task, run:

  kesl-control --start-task <task ID/name> -W


  Example:
  Enable display of the current events of the running task with ID=1:

  kesl-control --start-task 1 -W


To output information about current events that match the filter conditions, run:

  kesl-control -W --query "< filter conditions >"


filter conditions are set with one or more logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and.

  Example:
  Display TaskStateChanged events:

  kesl-control -W --query "EventType == 'TaskStateChanged'"

  Display TaskSettingsChanged events initiated by the 'User' user:

  kesl-control -W --query "EventType == 'TaskSettingsChanged' and Initiator == 'User'"




Displaying events from the event log

You can output information about events from the application event log to the console or a file. You can use a filter
to display only certain events.

To output information about all events in the application event log, run:

  kesl-control -E --query [--db < database file >]


  where < database file > is the full path to the event log database file to output events from. By default, the
  application saves information about events to the database at
  /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/storage/events.db. The location of the database is determined by the
  EventsStoragePath global application setting.


If the event log is located in the default database, you can output information about all events using the kesl-
control -E command.

You can use less to navigate the list of displayed events. By default, the application stores up to 500,000 events.
The maximum number of events that the application stores is determined by the MaxEventsNumber general
application setting.

To output information about events in the application event log that meet certain criteria, run:

  kesl-control -E --query "< filter conditions >" [--db < database file >] [-n < number >] [-
  -json] [--reverse]




                                                                        547
  where:


   < filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison
   operator > '< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results.

   < number > – number of the latest events of the selection (number of records from the end of the selection) to
   be displayed.

   --json: output events in JSON format.

   --reverse: display events in reverse order (from the newest event at the top to the oldest at the bottom).

To output information about events in the application event log that meet certain criteria to a file, run:

  kesl-control -E --query "< filter conditions >" [--db < database file >] [-n < number >] --
  file < file path > [--json]


  where --file < file path > is the full path to the file to output events to.




Configuring the display of notifications in the graphical
user interface
You can enable displaying pop-up notifications in the application's graphical user interface using the Web Console,
Administration Console, or the command line.


Configuring in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can configure displaying pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface in the policy
properties (Application settings → General settings → Application settings).

The Show pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface check box enables displaying pop-up notifications
in the graphical user interface.

The check box is selected by default.


Configuring in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure displaying pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface in
the policy properties (General settings → Application settings).

The Show pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface check box enables pop-up notifications in the
graphical user interface.

The check box is selected by default.




                                                         548
Configuring in the command line

On the command line, you can enable or disable displaying pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface
using the ShowPopUpNotifications setting in the General application settings.

You can edit the option via command line switches or a configuration file that contains all general application
settings.

The ShowPopUpNotifications setting can take the following values:

   Yes (default value) – show pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface.

   No – do not show pop-up notifications in the graphical user interface.




                                                        549
Application management via the graphical
user interface

  The graphical user interface is not supported when using Kaspersky Endpoint Security in Light Agent mode
  for protecting virtual environments.


You can do the following with the Kaspersky Endpoint Security graphical user interface:

   View information about device protection status.

   Enable and disable application components:

      File Threat Protection.

      Removable Drives Scan.

      Web Threat Protection.

      Network Threat Protection.

      Anti-Cryptor.

      Firewall Management.

      Application Control.

      Device Control.

      Behavior Detection.

      System Integrity Monitoring.

   Start and stop scan tasks:

      Malware Scan.

      Critical Areas Scan.

      Container Scan.

   Run a custom scan of files and directories.

   Start and stop database update and rollback tasks.

   Send a file or directory for scanning in KATA Sandbox.

   Enable and disable Kaspersky Security Network.

   View application statistics and reports.


                                                        550
   Manage application license keys and view information about the license under which the application is being
   used as well as the key associated with the license.

   View information about objects placed in Backup.

   Create application trace files.

If an application component and/or task is running in "Notify only" mode , the GUI of the component or task
displays the warning "Notify only" mode selected.




Graphical user interface

Application icon in the notification area

The Kaspersky Endpoint Security icon in the tray provides access to the context menu and the main window of the
graphical interface of the application.


  In some operating systems, the default application icon may be missing after installing the application
  graphical interface package.


The context menu of the application icon contains the following items:

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux. Opens the main window of the graphical interface of the
   application, which displays the protection status of a device and contains interface elements that provide
   access to the application functions.

   Exit. Exits the application graphical interface.


The main window of the application graphical interface

To open the main application window, do one of the following:

   Select the application name in the application menu of the operating system window manager.

   Right-click or double-click the application icon in the notification area of the taskbar.

The main graphical interface window of the application is divided into several parts:

   The central part of the main application window displays the protection status of the device. Clicking this part
   of the window opens the Protection Center window. This window displays information about the protection
   status of a device and recommendations on the actions to be performed to fix protection problems (if any).

   Under Scan, the Malware Scan task status and the number of detected threats are displayed. Clicking here
   opens the Scan window. In this window, you can start and stop the Malware Scan, Critical Areas Scan and
   Container Scan tasks. Also, you can view reports for these tasks.

   Under Update, the status of the Update task is displayed. Clicking here opens the Update window. In this
   window, you can start the Update and Rollback tasks. Also, you can view reports for these tasks.



                                                         551
   The lower part of the main application window contains the following elements:

      Reports button. Clicking this button opens the Reports window, where you can view component and task
      statistics and various reports.

      Backup button. Clicking this button opens the Backup window, which contains information about objects in
      Backup.

      Settings button. Clicking this button opens the Settings window, where you can enable or disable
      application components and configure the use of the Kaspersky Security Network.

      Support button. Clicking this button opens the Support window, which displays the current version of the
      application and the following information:

         License key displays the active main license key added to the application, or a message saying that no
         key has been added. The link in this field opens the Licenses window, which displays detailed license
         information.

         Key status displays information about the status of the active main license key, or a message saying that
         no key has been added.

         Database release date – status and release date of the application databases.

         Operating system – information about the operating system of the device.

         Application management – Information about whether the device is managed by a policy.

      The following links are displayed at the bottom of the Support window:

         Licenses, which opens the Licenses window, which displays detailed license information.

         Knowledge Base, which opens the Knowledge Base page.

         Support, which opens the Kaspersky CompanyAccount page.

         Tracing, which opens the Tracing window. In this window, you can create application trace files and
         configure the level of detail of the trace files.

   The lower part of the main application window displays information about the license and the key, as well as
   about licensing problems (if any). Clicking on this area of the window opens the Licenses window, which
   displays detailed license information.
   Clicking the Purchase a license button in this window opens the Kaspersky online store, where you can
   purchase a license. After purchasing a license, you will receive an activation code or a key file, which you will
   need to use to activate the application.




Enabling and disabling application components
You can enable or disable application components using the graphical interface. If the component is enabled, the
Disable button is available.




                                                         552
By default, the following components are enabled: File Threat Protection, Device Control, and Behavior Detection.
The Web Threat Protection component can be enabled automatically if local management of Web Threat
Protection settings is allowed on the device (a policy is not applied or the "lock" is not set in the policy properties)
and one of the supported browsers is detected in the system.

If a component is disabled, the Enable button will be available.

To enable or disable an application component:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the lower part of the main window, click the Settings button.
   The Settings window opens.

 3. Click Enable or Disable for the component.




Starting and stopping scan tasks
To start or stop a scan task:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the main window, click Scan.
   The Scan window will open.

 3. Do one of the following:

      To start a scan task, click the Start button under the scan task that you want to start.
      The progress of the running scan task is displayed.

      To stop a scan task, click the Stop button under the scan task that you want to stop.
      The scan task stops, and information about the scanned objects and detected threats is displayed.

 4. To view the report on the scan task, click the Show report button.

When an infected object is detected or the scan task is completed, a pop-up window appears in the notification
area near the application icon on the right side of the taskbar.

The Scan window also displays the progress and results of temporary boot sector scan tasks
(Scan_Boot_Sectors_{ID}) and temporary custom file scan tasks (Scan_File_{ID}). You can hide information
about temporary tasks that are already completed by clicking the cross or by closing the Scan window (when
switching to the main window or when exiting the application).




Starting a custom scan and a KATA Sandbox scan
You can run custom scans of files and directories using the graphical interface.




                                                         553
To run a custom scan of a file or directory:

 1. Right-click the file or directory that you want to scan to open the context menu.

 2. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux as the application for scanning the file or directory.
   Depending on the desktop environment, the names of the context menu commands may differ.

The custom scan task and its progress are displayed in the graphical interface.

If the integration of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the KATA Sandbox component is enabled,
you can send a file or directory for scanning to KATA Sandbox using the graphical interface.

To submit a file or directory to KATA Sandbox to be scanned:

 1. Right-click the file or directory that you want to send for scanning to open the context menu.

 2. Select Kaspersky Endpoint Security 12.2 for Linux as the application for scanning the file or directory.
   Depending on the desktop environment, the names of the context menu commands may differ.

 3. In the window that opens, select the Send to KATA Sandbox to be scanned.




Starting and stopping the Update task
To start or stop an update task:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the main application window, click Update.
   The Update window opens.

 3. Do one of the following:

       To start a task, click the Start button under the task that you want to start.
       The progress of the running update task is displayed.
       If the Update task finishes successfully, the Roll back update link becomes available, and you can roll back
       the last successful database update.

       To stop a task, click the Stop button under the scan task that you want to stop.
       The Update task stops.

 4. To view the report on the task, click the Show report button.

To start a rollback task:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the main application window, select the Update section.
   The Update window opens.

 3. Run the Rollback task by clicking the Roll back update link.

                                                         554
Configuring Kaspersky Security Network
Using the graphical user interface, you can enable or disable Kaspersky Security Network usage.

To enable use of Kaspersky Security Network:

 1. Open the main application window.

 2. In the lower part of the main application window, click the Settings button.
   The Settings window opens.

 3. In the Settings window, select one of the following options:

      Extended KSN mode, if you want to use Kaspersky Security Network, obtain information from the
      knowledge base, and send anonymous statistics and information about the types and sources of threats.

      Basic KSN mode, if you want to use Kaspersky Security Network, obtain information from the knowledge
      base, but not to send anonymous statistics and information about the types and sources of threats.

 4. Click the Enable button.
   The Using Kaspersky Security Network window opens.

 5. In the Using Kaspersky Security Network window, carefully read the Kaspersky Security Network Statement
    and select the I confirm that I have fully read, understand, and accept the terms and conditions of the
    Kaspersky Security Network Statement option.

 6. Click OK.
   The OK button is not available if none of the options are selected in the Kaspersky Security Network usage
   window.

To disable use of Kaspersky Security Network:

 1. Open the main application window.

 2. In the lower part of the main application window, click the Settings button.
   The Settings window opens.

 3. Click Enable.

 4. In the window that opens, click the Yes button to decline use of Kaspersky Security Network.




Viewing reports
You can view reports of application components and tasks using the graphical interface. Reports are displayed in
the window that opens when clicking Reports in the lower part of the main window of the application graphical
interface.




                                                        555
Report data is presented as a table that contains a list of events. Each line in the table contains information about
a separate event. Event attributes are displayed in the table columns. Events logged while various components and
tasks are running have different sets of attributes.

The following event importance levels are used in reports:

   Critical – events with the critical importance level that need your attention as they indicate problems in the
   application operation or vulnerabilities in the device protection

   High

   Medium

   Low

   Information

   Error

The following reports are available in the application:

   Statistics. This report contains File Threat Protection and scan task statistics. You can update the displayed
   report by clicking the Reload button.

   System audit. This report contains information about events that occur during the application operation and
   during the user interaction with the application.

   Threat protection. This report contains information about the events that are logged while the following
   application components were running:

      File Threat Protection.

      Removable Drives Scan.

      Anti-Cryptor.

      Web Threat Protection.

      Network Threat Protection.

      Firewall Management.

      Application Control.

      Device Control.

      Behavior Detection.

      System Integrity Monitoring.

   On-demand tasks. This report contains information about events logged by scan tasks, update tasks, and
   system integrity check tasks.

   Execution prevention for objects. This report contains information about events logged during object
   execution prevention by the EDR (KATA) and EDR Optimum components.

                                                          556
To view the report:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the lower part of the main application window, click the Reports button.
   The Reports window will open.

 3. In the left part of the Reports window, select the required report type.
   A report containing a list of events is displayed in the right part of the window.
   By default, events are sorted in ascending order by the values in the Date column.

 4. To view detailed information about an event, select the event in the report.
   The section that contains the attributes of this event is displayed at the bottom of the window.

For convenient processing of reports, you can modify the presentation of data on the screen in the following ways:

   Filter the list of events by occurrence time.

   Use the search function to find a specific event.

   View the selected event in a separate section.




Viewing Backup objects
You can do the following with objects in Backup using the graphical interface:

   View information about objects placed in Backup on the device.

   Restore objects from Backup to their original directories.

   Remove objects from Backup. Deleted objects cannot be restored in the future.

Information about restoring and deleting objects is saved to the event log.

To view objects in Backup:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the lower part of the main application window, click the Backup button.
   This opens the Backup window.

In this window the following information about the objects in Backup storage is displayed:

   Object name.

   Full path to an object.

   The date when the object was added to Backup.




                                                         557
   The date when the object was deleted from Backup (this field is displayed if Backup retention period is set).

   Object size.




Managing license keys
Using the graphical interface, you can add or remove application license keys, and view information about the
license under which the application is being used as well as the license key associated with the license.

To activate the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application on a protected device, you need to add main license key
to the application.

Activation is the process of giving effect to license that allows you to use a fully functional version of the
application until the license expires.

If the main license which you are using for the application does not cover the additional Kaspersky Endpoint
Security functionality that you need, you also need to add a license key to activate the additional functionality:

   A separate license key, "Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum Add-on" (hereinafter also
   referred to as the "EDR Optimum key"), to activate the Kaspersky EDR Optimum component.

   A separate license key, "Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform Add-on" (hereinafter also referred
   to as the "KUMA key"), to activate the Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform functionality.

You can also add a reserve key for the basic functionality and a reserve key for the additional functionality. A
reserve key becomes active when the license associated with the active key expires or when the active key is
deleted. Availability of a reserve key allows you to avoid application functionality limitation when your license
expires.


  A reserve license key can be added only after adding an active license key.




Adding a license key
If the application is not yet activated (an active main license key has not been added), you can activate the
application under a commercial license or under a trial license.

To activate the application:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. Do one of the following:

      In the lower part of the main window, click the area that displays information about the license and the key.

      In the lower part of the main window, click the Support button to open the Support window, and in that
      window, click either the License key or the Licenses link in the lower part of the window.

   This opens the Licenses window. Clicking the Purchase a license button in this window opens the Kaspersky
   online store, where you can purchase a license.
                                                         558
 3. If you want to activate the application under a commercial license:

    a. Click the Add button in the Commercial key section and perform the following actions, depending on the
       method you are using to add the key:

          If you want to add a key using an activation code, enter the activation code and click the Next button.

          If you want to add a key using a key file, click the Select a key file link to open the file selection window
          that window, select the file with the .key extension.

      The window displays information about the key and the license associated with it.

    b. Click the Activate button.

 4. If you want to activate the application under a trial license, click the Activate button in the Trial key section.
    The window displays information about the trial license and the associated key.


     You can use the application under a trial license for only one trial period.


After activating the application, you can add a reserve main license key and, if necessary, an active and reserve key
for additional functionality. The procedures for adding a reserve main key and keys for additional functionality are
the same.

To add a reserve main key or keys for additional functionality to the application:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. Do one of the following:

      In the lower part of the main window, click the area that displays information about the license and the key.

      In the lower part of the main window, click the Support button to open the Support window, and in that
      window, click either the License key or the Licenses link in the lower part of the window.

   This opens the Licenses window. The window displays information about previously added license keys.

 3. Click the Add button and perform the following actions, depending on the method you are using to add the key:

      If you want to add a key using an activation code, enter the activation code and click the Next button.

      If you want to add a key using a key file, click the Select a key file link to open the file selection window that
      window, select the file with the .key extension.

   The window displays information about the key and the license associated with it.

 4. Click Add.

If you add a main license key and the application is already activated, the new key is added as a reserve main key.




                                                          559
If you add a separate key for additional functionality, it is added as active unless a key for this additional
functionality has previously been added to the application. A new key for additional functionality is added as a
reserve key if a key for that additional functionality has already been added to the application.


  If both an active key and a reserve key were previously added to the application, the new key replaces the
  previously added reserve key.


A trial license key and a subscription key cannot be added as a reserve key.



Removing a license key
To remove a license key that has been added to the application:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. Do one of the following:

      In the lower part of the main window, click the area that displays information about the license and the key.

      In the lower part of the main window, click the Support button to open the Support window, and in that
      window, click either the License key or the Licenses link in the lower part of the window.

   The Licenses window will open.

 3. Click the Remove button to the right of the information about the key that you want to remove.

 4. Confirm the removal in the window that opens.




Viewing licensing information
To view license information:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. Do one of the following:

      In the lower part of the main window, click the area that displays information about the license and the key.

      In the lower part of the main window, click the Support button to open the Support window, and in that
      window, click either the License key or the Licenses link in the lower part of the window.

   This opens the Licenses window.
   The window displays information about the active and reserve keys added to the application. Click the More
   info link to view full information about the licenses and keys.




                                                        560
The Current licenses section displays information about the added active keys (active main key and active
additional functionality key) and the licenses associated with these keys:

   License type, license limitation, and license term.

   License key – a unique alphanumeric sequence.

   Key status – the status of the key or a message about the problems associated with the key (if any).

   Valid from – date when the application was activated by adding this key.

   Expires – the number of days before the license expires and the license expiration date (UTC).

   Name – the name of the application for which the activation key was added.

   Protection – information about restrictions on protection functions and the ability to update application
   databases.

The Reserve keys section displays information about the added reserve keys (reserve main key and reserve
additional functionality key) and the licenses associated with these keys:

   Type of reserve key, license limit, and license term associated with the key.

   License key – a unique alphanumeric sequence.

   License type – the type of license associated with the reserve key.

   Name – the name of the application for which the activation key was added.

   Protection – information about restrictions on protection functions and the ability to update application
   databases.




Creating a trace file
You can create application trace files and configure the level of detail of the trace files using the graphical
interface.


  To create a trace file and configure its level of detail, you need a user with the Administrator role (admin).


To create a trace file:

 1. Open the main window of the application graphical interface.

 2. In the lower part of the main application window, click the Support button.
   The Support window opens.

 3. Click the Tracing link to open the Tracing window

 4. In the Level drop-down list, select the level of detail for the trace file.
   You are advised to clarify the required level of detail with a Kaspersky Technical Support specialists. The default
   value is Diagnostic (300).

                                                            561
 5. Click the Enable button to start tracing.

 6. Reproduce the situation which caused the problem.

 7. Click the Disable button to stop tracing.

Created trace files are stored in /var/log/kaspersky/kesl/ directory.




                                                        562
Application components integrity check
Kaspersky Endpoint Security contains many various binary modules in the form of dynamic linked libraries,
executable files, configuration files, and interface files. Intruders can replace one or more application executable
modules or files with other files containing malicious code. To prevent the replacement of modules and files,
Kaspersky Endpoint Security can check integrity of the application components. The application checks modules
and files for unauthorized changes or corruption. If an application module or file has an incorrect checksum, it is
considered to be corrupted.

An integrity check is run for the following application components if installed on the device:

   application package

   Graphical user interface package

   Kaspersky Security Center Network Agent package

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in

   Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in

The integrity of the application components is checked using an integrity check utility. The utility checks integrity
of the files in the special lists called manifest files. Each application component has its own manifest file that
contains a list of application files whose integrity is important for correct operation of this application component.
The name of the manifest file is the same for each component, but the content of the manifest files differs. The
manifest files are digitally signed and their integrity is checked as well.


  To run the integrity check utility on Linux devices, an account with root privileges is required. An administrator
  account is required to run the integrity check utility on Windows devices.


The integrity check utility is installed with the application and located at the following paths:

   To check the application package, graphical user interface package, and the Network Agent:
   /opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/integrity_checker.

   To check the Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in:

      %ProgramFiles%\Kaspersky Lab\Kaspersky Security Center\Plugins\kesl_<version
      number>.plg\integrity_checker.exe – for 32-bit operating systems

      %ProgramFiles(x86)%\Kaspersky Lab\Kaspersky Security Center\Plugins\kesl_<version
      number>.plg\integrity_checker.exe – for 64-bit operating systems

   To check the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in:

      %ProgramFiles%\Kaspersky Lab\Kaspersky Security Center Web Console\integrity_checker.exe – on
      devices with Windows operating systems

      /var/opt/kaspersky/ksc-web-console/integrity_checker – on devices with Linux operating systems




                                                          563
The manifest files are located at the following paths:

   To check the integrity of the application package: /opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/integrity_check.xml.

   To check the integrity of the graphical user interface package:
   /opt/kaspersky/kesl/bin/gui_integrity_check.xml.

   To check Network Agent:

      /opt/kaspersky/klnagent/bin/kl_file_integrity_manifest.xml – for 32-bit operating systems

      /opt/kaspersky/klnagent64/bin/kl_file_integrity_manifest.xml – for 64-bit operating systems

   To check the Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in

      %ProgramFiles%\Kaspersky Lab\Kaspersky Security Center\Plugins\kesl_<plugin
      version>.plg\integrity_check.xml – for 32-bit operating systems

      %ProgramFiles(x86)%\Kaspersky Lab\Kaspersky Security Center\Plugins\kesl_<plugin
      version>.plg\integrity_check.xml – for 64-bit operating systems

   To check the Kaspersky Endpoint Security administration web plug-in:

      %ProgramFiles%\Kaspersky Lab\Kaspersky Security Center Web Console\server\plugins\kesl_<version
      number>\integrity_check.xml – on devices with Windows operating systems

      /var/opt/kaspersky/ksc-web-console/server/plugins/kesl_<version number>\integrity_check.xml – on
      devices with Linux operating systems

To check the integrity of a solution component, you need to run the tool from the folder of that component's tool.

To run the integrity check utility, run one of the following commands:

   To check the integrity of the application package and graphical user interface package:
   integrity_checker [< path to manifest file >] --signature-type kds-with-filename

   To check the integrity of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC management plug-in:
   integrity_checker.exe [< path to manifest file >]

   To check the integrity of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-in and Network Agent on
   devices with Linux operating systems:
   integrity_checker [< path to manifest file >]

   To check the integrity of Kaspersky Endpoint Security management web plug-ins on Windows devices:
   integrity_checker.exe [< path to manifest file >]

  The default path is for a manifest file located in the same directory as the integrity checker utility.


You can run the utility with the following optional settings:

   --crl < directory > – path to the directory containing the Certificate Revocation List.

   --version – display the version of the utility.

                                                          564
   --verbose – display detailed information about performed actions and their results. If you do not specify this
   setting, only errors, objects that did not pass the check, and scan statistics summary will be displayed.

   --trace < file name >, where < file name > is the name of the file where events that happen during scans
   will be logged at the DEBUG level of detail.

   --signature-type kds-with-filename is the type of the signature to be checked (this setting is required
   for checking the application package and the graphical user interface package).

   --single-file < file > – scan only one file in the manifest; ignore the other objects in the manifest.

You can view description of all available integrity check utility settings in the help on the utility options by running
the integrity_checker --help command.

The result of checking the manifest files is displayed as follows:

   SUCCEEDED — integrity of the files has been confirmed (return code 0).

   FAILED – integrity of the files has not been confirmed (return code is not 0).

If a violation of the integrity of the application or Network Agent is detected when the application starts,
Kaspersky Endpoint Security generates the corresponding event in the event log and in Kaspersky Security
Center.




                                                          565
Contact Technical Support
If you do not find a solution to your problem in the application documentation or other sources of information
about the application, it is recommended to contact Technical Support. Technical Support specialists will answer
any of your questions about installing and using Kaspersky Endpoint Security.


  Kaspersky provides support for Kaspersky Endpoint Security for the whole duration of its life cycle (see
  Application life cycle ). Before contacting Technical Support, please read the support rules .


You can contact Technical Support in one of the following ways:

   Visit Technical Support website .

   Submit a request to Kaspersky Technical Support from the Kaspersky CompanyAccount portal .




Technical Support via Kaspersky CompanyAccount
Kaspersky CompanyAccount is a portal for companies that use Kaspersky applications. The Kaspersky
CompanyAccount portal is designed to facilitate interaction between users and Kaspersky specialists through
online requests. The Kaspersky CompanyAccount portal lets you monitor the progress of electronic request
processing by Kaspersky specialists and store a history of electronic requests.

You can register all of your organization's employees under a single account on Kaspersky CompanyAccount. A
single account lets you centrally manage electronic requests from registered employees to Kaspersky and also
manage the privileges of these employees via Kaspersky CompanyAccount.

The Kaspersky CompanyAccount portal is available in the following languages:

   English

   Spanish

   Italian

   German

   Polish

   Portuguese

   Russian

   French

   Japanese

To learn more about Kaspersky CompanyAccount, visit the Technical Support website .




                                                      566
Obtaining information for Technical Support
After you inform Kaspersky Technical Support specialists about the problem, they may ask you to send a trace file
or dump file.

Technical Support specialists may also need additionally information about the operating system and running
processes on the device, as well as detailed reports on the operation of application components.

While diagnosing the problem, Technical Support specialists may ask you to change the application settings to:

   activate functionality to receive advanced diagnostic information;

   perform more detailed configuration of individual application components that cannot be performed through
   the standard user interface;

   change settings for storing received diagnostic information;

   to configure the capture and storage of network traffic in a file.

Technical Support specialists will tell you all the information required to perform these actions (the sequence of
steps, the settings to change, configuration files, scripts, advanced command line capabilities, debugging modules,
special utilities, etc.), as well as the body of information received for diagnostic purposes. The received advanced
diagnostic information is stored on the user device. This information is not automatically sent to Kaspersky.


  The steps listed above should be performed only with the guidance of Technical Support specialists based on
  instructions they provide. Independently changing application files using means not described in the
  application documentation or not recommended by Technical Support specialists may lead to poor
  performance and failures in the application and operating system, reduced protection, as well as inaccessible
  and corrupted data.




About application trace files
A trace file tracks the step-by-step execution of application commands and detects at what stage of application
operation the error occurs.

Application trace files are not generated by default. You can enable or disable generation of application trace files
and define the level of detail in trace files in the command line via the general application settings and the graphical
user interface.

If you have enabled application trace files, these will be stored at /var/log/kaspersky/kesl/. Access to this directory
requires root privileges.

Trace files are stored on the device as long as the application is in use, and are deleted permanently when the
application is removed. Trace files are not sent to Kaspersky automatically.


  Trace files are saved in a human-readable format. It is recommended to protect information from
  unauthorized access before sending it to Kaspersky.


                                                         567
Application trace file contents

Trace files contain the following general data:

   Event time.

   Number of the thread of execution.

   Application component that caused the event.

   Degree of event severity (informational event, warning, critical event, error).

   A description of the event involving command execution by a component of the application and the result of
   execution of this command.

Trace files may store the following information in addition to general data:

   The statuses of the application components and their operational data.

   Data on user activity in the application.

   Data on the hardware installed on the device.

   Data about all operating system objects and events, including information about user activity.

   Data contained in the objects of the operating system (for example, the contents of files that may contain any
   user personal data).

   Network traffic data (for example, the contents of the entry fields on a website, which may include bank card
   information or any other sensitive data).

   Data received from Kaspersky servers (such as the version of the application databases).

   Data received from KATA servers, NDR servers, and Central Node servers that provide interaction with KATA
   Sandbox.

   Data on consumed CPU resources.

   Data on consumed RAM resources.

   Data about file read and write operations by applications.

   Data on the amount of cached information required for the application to work.



Configuring application trace settings
If you are managing the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application through Kaspersky Security Center, you can
manage the trace settings of the application in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security policy settings using the Web
Console or the Administration Console.

If you are managing the application on the command line, you can configure trace settings of the application in the
general application settings.


                                                         568
Editing trace settings in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can configure application tracing settings in the policy properties (Application settings
→ General settings → Application settings, Trace and dump settings section) (see the table below).

Application trace settings

         Setting                                                                       Description

   Path to the trace         Input field for the path to the directory where the trace files are stored.
   file directory            Default value: /var/log/kaspersky/kesl.
                             If you specify a different directory, make sure that the account under which Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running
                             has read/write permissions for this directory. Root privileges are required to access the default trace files directory.

   Maximum number            Input field for the maximum number of application trace files.
   of trace files
                             Default value: 10.

   Maximum trace file        Input field for the maximum size of an application trace (in megabytes).
   size (MB)                 Default value: 500.




   To apply trace settings, you must restart the application.



Editing trace settings in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can configure application tracing settings in the policy properties (General
settings → Application settings).

Under Trace and dump settings, click Configure to open a window in which you can edit the trace settings (see
the table below).

Application trace settings

         Setting                                                                       Description

   Path to the trace         Input field for the path to the directory where the trace files are stored.
   file directory            Default value: /var/log/kaspersky/kesl.
                             If you specify a different directory, make sure that the account under which Kaspersky Endpoint Security is running
                             has read/write permissions for this directory. Root privileges are required to access the default trace files directory.

   Maximum trace file        Input field for the maximum size of an application trace (in megabytes).
   size (MB)
                             Default value: 500.

   Maximum number            Input field for the maximum number of application trace files.
   of trace files            Default value: 10.




   To apply trace settings, you must restart the application.



Editing trace settings in the command line

In the command line, you can configure application tracing settings using the TraceLevel, TraceFolder,
TraceMaxFileCount and TraceMaxFileSize settings in general application settings.




                                                                            569
The TraceLevel setting lets you enable or disable the creation of application trace files and specify the level of
detail in trace files. This setting can take the following values:

   Detailed – Generate a detailed trace file.

   MediumDetailed – Generate a trace file that contains informational messages and error messages.

   NotDetailed – Generate a trace file that contains error messages.

   None (default value) — Do not generate a trace file.

The TraceFolder settings lets you specify the directory where application trace files are stored. Default value:
/var/log/kaspersky/kesl. If you specify a different directory, make sure that the account under which Kaspersky
Endpoint Security is running has only read/write permissions for this directory (rwx-------- 700 permissions). Root
privileges are required to access the default trace files directory.

The TraceMaxFileCount setting lets you specify the maximum number of application trace files. The setting can
take values from 1 to 10000. Default value: 10.

The TraceMaxFileSize setting lets you specify the maximum size of an application trace file (in megabytes). The
setting can take values from 1 to 1000. Default value: 500.

You can change the values of the settings with the help of command line switches or a configuration file that
contains all general application settings.


  After changing the values of the TraceFolder, TraceMaxFileCount, or TraceMaxFileSize settings, you
  need to restart the application.




Application management plug-in trace files
Administration plug-in trace files are not sent to Kaspersky automatically.


  Trace files are saved in a human-readable format. It is recommended to protect information from
  unauthorized access before sending it to Kaspersky.



Administration MMC plug-in trace files

If you use the Administration Console to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, information about events that
occur while the administration MMC plug-in is running can be saved to the Kaspersky Endpoint Security MMC
plug-in trace file on the device where the Administration Server is installed. The file name contains the application
version number, file creation date and time, and process identifier (PID). This file contains information about the
events that occur during MMC plug-in operation, in particular, about the operation of policies and tasks.

MMC plug-in trace files are not generated by default. You can use registry keys to create the MMC plug-in trace
file. Contact Technical Support representatives for detailed information on how to create trace files.

All created trace files of the MMC plug-in are located in the folder specified by the user during registry key
configuration.



                                                          570
Management web plug-in trace files

If you use the Web Console to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, information about events that occur while
the administration web plug-in is running can be written to the web plug-in trace files.

Trace files for the web plug-in are created automatically if logging of Web Console activities is enabled in Web
Console Installation Wizard (for more details, refer to the Kaspersky Security Center Help).

Trace files of the web plug-in are stored in the Web Console installation folder in the "logs" subfolder.


Contents of management plug-in trace files

Trace files contain the following general data:

   Event time.

   Number of the thread of execution.

   Application component that caused the event.

   Degree of event severity (informational event, warning, critical event, error).

   A description of the event involving command execution by a component of the application and the result of
   execution of this command.

In addition to general data, trace files may contain the following information:

   Personal data, including the last name, first name, and middle name, if such data is part of the path to files.

   The name of the account used to log in to the operating system if the user account name is part of a file name.



About dump files
A dump file contains all information about the working memory of Kaspersky Endpoint Security processes at the
time of creating the dump


  Dump files may contain personal data. It is recommended to protect information from unauthorized access
  before sending it to Kaspersky.


No dump files are generated by default. You can enable or disable dumping in case of application failures.

If you enabled dumping, dump files are stored at /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/dumps and
/var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/dumps-user.

Root privileges are required to access dump files.

Dump files are stored on the computer as long as the application is in use, and are deleted permanently when the
application is removed. Dump files are not sent to Kaspersky automatically.




                                                         571
Enabling or disabling dump logging
If you are managing the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application through Kaspersky Security Center, you can
enable or disable dumping in the Kaspersky Endpoint Security policy settings using the Web Console or the
Administration Console.

If you use the command line to manage the application, you can enable or disable dumping via the kesl.ini
configuration file.

The maximum number of dump files is limited.


   Depending on the operating system settings, user dump files may not be created. Make sure that the system
   kernel is configured using sysctl kernel.yama.ptrace_scope=0.



Enabling or disabling dumping in the Web Console

In the Web Console, you can enable or disable logging dump files in the policy properties (Application settings →
General settings → Application settings, Trace and dump settings section) (see the table below).

Dump file settings

                     Setting                                                               Description

   Create a dump file if the application   This check box enables or disables the creation of a dump file when the application crashes.
   crashes                                 This check box is cleared by default.

   Path to the dump file directory         Input field for the path to the directory where the dump files are stored. The input field is limited to 128
                                           characters.
                                           Default value: /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/dumps.




   You must restart the application to apply the dump file settings.



Enabling or disabling dumping in the Administration Console

In the Administration Console, you can enable or disable logging dump files in the policy properties (General
settings → Application settings).

Under Trace and dump settings, click Configure to open a window in which you can edit the dump settings (see
the table below).




                                                                     572
Dump file settings

                     Setting                                                               Description

   Create a dump file if the application   This check box enables or disables the creation of a dump file when the application crashes.
   crashes                                 This check box is cleared by default.

   Path to the dump file directory         Input field for the path to the directory where the dump files are stored. The input field is limited to 128
                                           characters.
                                           Default value: /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/dumps.




   You must restart the application to apply the dump file settings.



Enabling or disabling dumping on the command line

To enable or disable dumping via the kesl.ini configuration file, do as follows:

  1. Stop Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

 2. Open the /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/kesl.ini file for editing.

 3. Under [General], set the parameter value:

        CoreDumps=yes: enable dumping in case of a failure.

        CoreDumps=no: disable dumping.

 4. If you want to change the default directory where dump files are saved, specify the path to the directory in the
    CoreDumpsPath option.

 5. Start Kaspersky Endpoint Security.




Remote device diagnostics using Kaspersky Security
Center
In Kaspersky Security Center you can perform remote diagnostics of client devices. The remote diagnostics
procedure lets you remotely run the following operations:

    Enable or disable tracing.

    Change the trace level.

    Download trace files.

    Download a remote application installation log.

    Download system event (syslog) logs.

    Start, stop, and restart applications.




                                                                     573
Remote diagnostics in the Web Console

If you use the Web Console to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, remote diagnostics of a client device is done
in the remote diagnostics window.

To open the remote device diagnostics window for a device:

 1. In the main window of the Web Console, select Assets (Devices) → Managed devices.
   The list of managed devices opens.

 2. Select a device that you want to diagnose remotely and click the <device name> link.
   The device properties window opens.

 3. On the Advanced tab, select the Remote diagnostics section.

In the device remote diagnostics window, you can view the remote installation log.

To view the remote installation log on a device, do as follows:

 1. Open the remote device diagnostics window.

 2. On the Event logs tab, under Trace files block, click Remote installation logs.
   The Device trace event logs window opens.

For more information about the remote diagnostics, see the Kaspersky Security Center Help .


Remote diagnostics using the Administration Console

If you use the Administration Console to manage Kaspersky Endpoint Security, remote diagnostics is done using
the special Kaspersky Security Center remote diagnostics utility automatically installed on the device together
with the Administration Console.

To open the main window of the remote diagnostics utility, do as follows:

 1. In the Administration Console tree, in the Managed devices folder, select the administration group containing
    the necessary device.

 2. In the workspace, select the Devices tab.

 3. In the list of managed devices, select the device to which you want to connect the remote diagnostics utility,
    and select External tools → Remote diagnostics in the device context menu.
   The main window of the Kaspersky Security Center remote diagnostics utility opens.

You can use the remote device diagnostics utility to view the remote installation log.

To view the remote installation log on a device, do as follows:

 1. Open the main window of the remote diagnostics utility.

 2. Configure the options for connecting the utility to the device if needed. In the main window of the remote
    diagnostics utility, click the Log in button.

 3. In the window that opens, in the objects tree, select the Remote installation logs folder.
                                                         574
For more information about the remote diagnostics utility, refer to Kaspersky Security Center Help section .




                                                      575
Appendices
This section provides information that complements the primary Help text.




Appendix 1. Resource consumption optimization
When scanning objects, Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses CPU resources, disk subsystem input/output, and RAM.

To view the resource consumption by the application, execute the following command:

  top -bn1|grep kesl



  The command must be executed when the system is loaded.


The command output shows the amount of used memory and processor time:

651 root 20 0 3014172 2.302g 154360 S 120.0 30.0 0:32.80 kesl

Column 6 displays the amount of resident memory – 2.302g.

Column 9 displays the percentage of the processor cores usage – 120.0, where each core is represented by 100
percent. Thus, 120% means that one core is fully used, and the other is used at 20%.

If Kaspersky Endpoint Security critically slows down the system while scanning objects, you must configure the
application to optimize system resource utilization.




Determining the task that consumes resources
To determine which application tasks are consuming system resources, it is necessary to distinguish the resource
consumption of File Threat Protection tasks (OAS type) and On-demand Scan tasks (ODS and ContainerScan
types).

If the application is managed by Kaspersky Security Center policy, it is required to allow local task management for
the period of the study.




                                                       576
File Threat Protection task operation analysis
To analyze the operation of the File Threat Protection task:

 1. Stop all scan and monitoring tasks.

 2. Make sure that the on-demand scan tasks will not run during the scan or have no schedule. You can do it using
    Kaspersky Security Center or locally by doing the following steps:

    a. Get the list of all application tasks by executing the following command:
      kesl-control --get-task-list

    b. Get the schedule settings for the Malware Scan task by executing the following command:
      kesl-control --get-schedule < task ID >
      If the command output is RuleType=Manual, the task can only be started manually.

    c. Get the schedule settings for all your Malware Scan tasks, if any, and set them to start manually by
       executing the following command:
      kesl-control --set-schedule < task ID > RuleType=Manual

 3. Enable generation of application trace files with a high level of details by executing the following command:
   kesl-control --set-app-settings TraceLevel=Detailed

 4. Start the File Threat Protection task if it has not been started by executing the following command:
   kesl-control --start-task 1

 5. Load the system in the mode that caused the performance problems; a few hours is enough.
   While being loaded, the application writes a lot of information to the trace files; however only 5 files of 500 MB
   are stored by default, so the old information will be overwritten. If the problems with performance and resource
   consumption stop occurring, then they are most likely caused by on-demand scan tasks and you can proceed
   to analyzing the operation of ContainerScan and ODS scan tasks.

 6. Disable creation of the application trace files by executing the following command:
   kesl-control --set-app-settings TraceLevel=None

 7. Determine the list of objects that have been scanned the most times by running the following command:
   fgrep 'AVP ENTER' /var/log/kaspersky/kesl/kesl.* | awk '{print $8}' | sort | uniq -c |
   sort -k1 -n -r|less
   The result is loaded into less, a text viewer utility, where the objects that have been scanned the most times are
   displayed first.

 8. Determine whether the objects scanned the most number of times are dangerous. In case of any difficulties,
    contact Technical Support.
   For example, directories and log files can be considered safe if a trusted process writes to them, database files
   can also be considered safe.

 9. Write down the paths to the objects that are safe, in your opinion; the paths will be required to configure
    exclusions from the scan scope.


                                                        577
10. If various services frequently write data to files in the system, such files are scanned again in the pending queue.
    Determine the list of paths that have been scanned the most times in the pending queue by running the
    following command:
   fgrep 'SYSCALL' /var/log/kaspersky/kesl/kesl.* | fgrep 'KLIF_ACTION_CLOSE_MODIFY' |
   awk '{print $10}' | sort | uniq -c | sort -k1 -n -r
   The files that were scanned the most times will appear at the beginning of the list.

 11. If the counter for a file exceeds several thousands in a few hours, you should check whether you can trust this
     file in order to exclude it from scan.
   The logic of to determine it is the same as for the previous study (see step 8): log files can be considered safe,
   since they cannot be launched.

12. Even if some files are excluded from scan by the Real-time protection task, they can still be intercepted by the
    application. If excluding certain files from Real-time protection does not result in significant increase of
    performance, you can completely exclude the mount point where these files are located from the interception
    scope of the application. To do so, do the following:

    a. Run the following command to get the list of files intercepted by the application:
       grep 'FACACHE.*needs' /var/log/kaspersky/kesl/kesl.* | awk '{print $9}' | sort |
       uniq -c | sort -k1 -n -r

    b. Using this list, determine the paths used for most of the file operation interceptions and configure
       interception exceptions.



On-demand Scan tasks operation analysis
Tasks of the ODS and ContainerScan types can also cause significant resource consumption. Follow these
recommendations for the tasks of ODS type:

   Make sure that several on-demand scan tasks are not running at the same time. The application allows for
   operation in this mode, but resource consumption can significantly increase. Check the schedule of all tasks of
   the ODS and ContainerScan types locally (as described for the File Threat Protection task) or using Kaspersky
   Security Center.

   Run the scan during the minimum server load.

   Make sure that there are no mounted remote resources (SMB/NFS) at the specified scan path. If a remote
   resource scan task cannot be performed directly on the server that provides the resource, do not perform the
   resource scan on servers with critical services, as execution of this task can take a long time (depending on the
   connection speed and the number of files).

   Optimize the settings of the on-demand scan task before start.




Configuring the File Threat Protection task
If, after analysis of the File Threat Protection task's operation, you have created a list of directories and files that
can be excluded from the scan scope, you need to add them to the exclusions.




                                                          578
Scan exclusions

To exclude the /tmp/logs directory and all subdirectories and files recursively, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 1 --add-exclusion /tmp/logs


To exclude a specific file or files by mask in the /tmp/logs directory, execute the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 1 --add-exclusion /tmp/logs/*.log


To exclude all files with the .log extension in the /tmp/ directory and subdirectories using a recursive mask, execute
the following command:

  kesl-control --set-settings 1 --add-exclusion /tmp/**/*.log


Interception exclusions

If you want to exclude files in a certain directory not only from scan, but also from interception, you can exclude
the entire mount point.

To exclude an entire mount point:

 1. If the directory is not a mount point, create a mount point from it. For example, to create a mount point from
    the /tmp directory, execute the following command:
   mount --bind /tmp/ /tmp

 2. To keep the mount point after the server reboot, add the following line to the /etc/fstab file:
   /tmp /tmp none defaults,bind 0 0

 3. Add the /tmp directory to the global exceptions by executing the following command:
   kesl-control --set-app-settings ExcludedMountPoint.item_0000=/tmp

 4. If you want to add several directories, increase the item_0000 counter by one (item_0001, item_0002, and so
    on).


  It is also recommended to exclude mount points that are mounted remote resources with unstable or slow
  connection.



Changing scan type

By default, the File Threat Protection task can scan files when they are opened or closed. If analysis of the File
Threats Protection task performance shows that too many files are being written, you can make the task operate
only when files are opened by running the following command:

  kesl-control --set-set 1 ScanByAccessType=Open


In this operation mode, changes made to the file after it is opened are not scanned until the next opening of the
file.

                                                        579
Configuring the On-demand Scan task

Scan exclusions

You can define scan exclusions for on-demand ODS and ContainerScan tasks. You can configure this in the same
way as scan exclusions for the File Threat Protection task.


  Scan exclusion settings for one scan task do not affect other scan tasks. Exclusions must be configured
  separately for each scan task.



Setting the memory usage limits when unpacking archives

The on-demand scan task uses RAM to unpack archives when scanning the archives recursively. The application
allows adjusting the memory usage while scanning files using the ScanMemoryLimit parameter in the kesl.ini
configuration file. The default value is 8192 MB. The minimum value is 2 MB. If the specified value is less than 2 MB,
the application uses the minimum value (2 MB). If the specified value is greater than the amount of RAM available in
the system, the application uses up to 25% of the RAM. This value cannot be changed.



Setting the application memory usage limit
You can limit the amount of RAM that Kaspersky Endpoint Security uses when running OAS, ODS, and
ContainerScan scan tasks.

Limiting memory usage can be useful for systems with a large amount of RAM (more than 5 GB).

You can use the ScanMemoryLimit option in the kesl.ini configuration file to adjust the size of RAM used by the
application when scanning files. Default value: 8192 MB. The minimum value is 2 MB. If the specified value is less than
2 MB, the application uses the minimum value (2 MB). If the specified value is greater than the amount of RAM
available on the device, the application uses up to 25% of the RAM. This value cannot be changed.


  This setting limits only the amount of memory used when scanning files. That means that the total amount of
  memory required by the application can be more than the value of this setting.


To specify a limit on memory use when scanning files:

 1. Stop Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

 2. Open the /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/kesl.ini file for editing.

 3. Under [General], specify the required amount of RAM in megabytes in the ScanMemoryLimit setting:
   ScanMemoryLimit=< amount of memory in megabytes >

 4. Start Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

  The new memory usage limit for scanning files will be in effect after the application restarts.

                                                        580
Appendix 2. Commands for managing Kaspersky
Endpoint Security
In the command line, Kaspersky Endpoint Security is managed using Kaspersky Endpoint Security management
commands.

You can view the help on management commands by running:

kesl-control --help < command group prefix >

Where < command group prefix > accepts the following values:

   -A: commands for managing Application Control

   -B: commands for managing Backup

   -C: commands for managing general container scan settings

   -D: commands for managing Device Control

   -E: commands for managing application events

   -F: commands for managing firewall

   -H: commands for managing blocked devices

   -J: commands for managing the obtaining of system performance metrics

   -L: commands for managing license keys

   -M: commands for managing the integration settings of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with
   Kaspersky Unified Monitoring and Analysis Platform

   -N: commands for managing encrypted connections scan settings

   -Q: commands for managing the Quarantine

   -R: commands for managing the settings of Kaspersky Endpoint Security integration with Kaspersky Endpoint
   Detection and Response (KATA), Kaspersky Network Detection and Response (KATA), and Kaspersky Endpoint
   Detection and Response Optimum

   -S: statistics commands

   -T: commands for managing application tasks and settings

   -U: commands for managing users and roles

   -V: application commands in light agent mode for protecting virtual environments




                                                     581
   -W: event display commands

   -X: commands for managing the integration settings of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application with the
   KATA Sandbox component



Commands for managing application tasks and settings
-T is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing application settings
and tasks.

-C is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing container scan
settings.

-N is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing network traffic scan
settings.


kesl-control --export-settings

This command outputs all application settings to the console or exports to a configuration file. These include
general container scan settings, encrypted connections scan settings, general application settings, and task
settings.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --export-settings [--file < configuration file path >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file where the application settings
will be saved.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are
output in the INI format.


kesl-control --import-settings

This command imports all application settings from a configuration file, including general container scan settings,
encrypted connections scan settings, general application settings, and task settings.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --import-settings - - file < configuration file path > [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which you want to import
settings into the application.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json option is not
specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.


                                                        582
kesl-control --update-application

This command installs a downloaded application module update.


  It can only be executed if the application is being used in standard mode.


Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --update-application



Commands for managing general application settings

The kesl-control --get-app-settings command

The command outputs the current values of the general application settings to the console or a configuration file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --get-app-settings [--file < configuration file path >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file where the application general
settings will be written. If you do not specify the --file option, settings will be output to the console.

If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a file already
exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not exist, no configuration file
will be generated.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are
output in the INI format.


The kesl-control --set-app-settings command

This command configures the general application settings via command options or by importing settings from a
configuration file.

Command syntax

Define settings via command options:

kesl-control [-T] --set-app-settings < option name >=< option value > [< option name >=
< option value >]

Define settings via a configuration file:

kesl-control [-T] --set-app-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json]

Arguments and keys

                                                            583
< option name >=< option value >: the name and value of a general application setting.

--file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which you want to import
settings into the application.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file into the application in JSON format. If the -
-json option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
displayed.



Commands for managing task settings

kesl-control --get-settings

This command outputs the current settings for a specified task to the console or a configuration file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --get-settings < task ID/name > [--file < configuration file path >] [--
json]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

--file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file into which the task settings will be
written. If you do not specify the --file option, settings will be output to the console.

If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a file already
exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not exist, no configuration file
will be generated.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are
output in the INI format.


kesl-control --set-settings

This command defines the settings for a specified task via command options or by importing settings from a
configuration file.

Command syntax

Define settings via command options:

kesl-control [-T] --set-settings < task name/ID > < option name >=< option value > [< option
name >=< option value >] [--add-path < path >] [--del-path < path >] [--add-exclusion < path >]
[--del-exclusion < path >]

Define settings via a configuration file:




                                                            584
kesl-control [-T] --set-settings < task name/ID > --file < configuration file path > [--
json]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

< setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the task settings.

--add-path < path > adds the path to the directory with the objects to be scanned.

--del-path < path > deletes the path to the directory with the objects to be scanned.

--add-exclusion < path >: add the path to the directory with objects to exclude from scanning.

--del-exclusion < path > deletes the path to the directory with the objects to be excluded.

--file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which the task settings will
be imported.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json option is not
specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.


kesl-control --set-to-default

The command restores the default settings for the specified task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --set-settings < task ID/name > --set-to-default

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.


The kesl-control --get-schedule command

The command outputs the current schedule of the specified task to the console or a configuration file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --get-schedule < task ID/name > [--file < configuration file path >] [--
json]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

--file < configuration file path > is the path to the configuration file in which the settings for the task run
schedule will be written. If you do not specify the --file option, settings will be output to the console.
                                                       585
If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a file already
exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not exist, no configuration file
will be generated.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are
output in the INI format.


The kesl-control --set-schedule command

The command defines a schedule for the specified task via command options or by importing settings from a
configuration file.

Command syntax

Define settings via command options:

kesl-control [-T] --set-schedule < task ID/name > < option name >=< option value > [< option
name >=< option value >]

Define settings via a configuration file:

kesl-control [-T] --set-schedule < task ID/name > --file < configuration file path > [--
json]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

< setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the settings for the task schedule.

--file < configuration file path > is the full path to the configuration file from which the task schedule
settings will be imported.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json option is not
specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.



Commands for managing tasks

kesl-control --get-task-list

This command outputs a list of existing tasks.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --get-task-list [--json]

Arguments and keys

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format.


                                                            586
kesl-control --get-task-state

This command outputs the status of the specified task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --get-task-state < task ID/name > [--json]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format.


kesl-control --create-task

This command creates a task of the specified type with the default settings or settings specified in a
configuration file.

Command syntax

Create a task with the default settings:

kesl-control [-T] --create-task < task name > --type < task type >

Create a task with the settings from a configuration file:

kesl-control [-T] --create-task < task name > --type < task type > --file < path to the
configuration file > [--json]

Arguments and keys

< task name > is the name that you specify for the new task.

< task type > is the identifier for the type of the created task.

--file < configuration file path >: the full path to the configuration file to import settings from.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file in JSON format. If the --json option is not
specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is displayed.


kesl-control --delete-task

This command deletes a task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --delete-task < task ID/name >

Arguments and keys


                                                        587
< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.


kesl-control --start-task

This command starts a task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --start-task < task ID/name > [-W] [--progress]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

[-W]: enable current events output.

[--progress]: display task progress.


kesl-control --stop-task

This command stops a task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --stop-task < task ID/name > [-W]

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.

[-W]: enable current events output.


kesl-control --suspend-task

This command pauses a task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --suspend-task < task ID/name >

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.




                                                       588
kesl-control --resume-task

This command resumes a task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --resume-task < task ID/name >

Arguments and keys

< task ID/name > is the ID assigned to the task at the time of its creation, or the name of the task in the
command line.


kesl-control --scan-file

This command creates and runs a custom scan task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --scan-file < path > [--action < action >]

Arguments and keys

< path >: the path to the file or directory to scan. You can specify multiple paths by separating them with a space.

--action < action > is the action to be performed by the application on the infected objects. If you do not
specify the --action option, the application performs the recommended action.


kesl-control --scan-container

This command creates and runs a custom container or image scan task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --scan-container < ID/name [: tag ]>

Arguments and keys

< ID/name [: tag ]> is the name or ID of the container or image. You can use masks to scan several objects.


  You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or directory name mask.

  You can indicate a single * character to represent any set of characters (including an empty set) preceding
  the / character in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file.

  You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent any set of characters (including an empty set and
  the / character) in the file or directory name. For example, /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/.

  The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

  You can use a single ? character to represent any one character in the file or directory name.

                                                       589
Commands for managing execution prevention for objects

kesl-control --get-prevention-state

This command outputs execution prevention rules for objects received from the specified component.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --get-prevention-state [--kata|--edro]

Arguments and keys

--kata outputs execution prevention rules for objects received from the Endpoint Detection and Response
(KATA) component.

--edro outputs execution prevention rules for objects received from the Endpoint Detection and Response
Optimum component.



Commands for managing general Container Scan settings

The kesl-control --get-container-settings command

The command outputs the current general container scan settings to the console or a configuration file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-C] --get-container-settings [--file < configuration file path >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < configuration file path >: the path to the configuration file where general container scan settings
will be saved If you do not specify the --file option, settings will be output to the console.

If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a file already
exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not exist, no configuration file
will be generated.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are
output in the INI format.


The kesl-control --set-container-settings command

The command configures the general container scan settings with command options or by importing settings from
a configuration file.

Command syntax

Define settings via command options:
                                                            590
kesl-control [-C] --set-container-settings < setting name >=< setting value > [< setting
name >=< setting value >]

Define settings via a configuration file:

kesl-control [-C] --set-container-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json]

Arguments and keys

< option name > = < option value >: the name and value of a general container scan setting.

--file < configuration file path >: the full path to the configuration file; general container scan settings
from this file will be imported into the application.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file into the application in JSON format. If the -
-json option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
displayed.



Commands for managing network traffic scan settings
-N is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing network traffic scan
settings.


kesl-control -N --query

The command outputs lists of exclusions from encrypted connections scanning:

   a list of exclusions added by the user;

   a list of exclusions added by the application;

   list of exclusions received from the application databases.

Command syntax

kesl-control -N --query user

kesl-control -N --query auto

kesl-control -N --query kl


kesl-control --clear-web-auto-excluded

This command clears the list of domains that the application has automatically excluded from scanning.

Command syntax

kesl-control -N --clear-web-auto-excluded




                                                        591
kesl-control --get-net-settings

This command outputs the current network traffic scan settings to the console or a configuration file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-N] --get-net-settings [--file < configuration file path >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < configuration file path >: the path to the configuration file to output the network traffic scan
settings to. If you do not specify the --file option, settings will be output to the console.

If you specify the name of a file without its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a file already
exists in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory does not exist, no configuration file
will be generated.

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format. If the --json option is not specified, the settings are
output in the INI format.


kesl-control --set-net-settings

This command configures the network traffic scan settings with command options or by importing settings from a
configuration file.

Command syntax

Define settings via command options:

kesl-control [-N] --set-net-settings < option name >=< option value > [< option name >=
< option value >]

Define settings via a configuration file:

kesl-control [-N] --set-net-settings --file < configuration file path > [--json]

Arguments and keys

where < setting name >=< setting value > is the name and value of one of the network traffic scan settings.

--file < configuration file path >: the full path to the configuration file to import network traffic scan
settings from.

--json is specified to import the settings from the configuration file into the application in JSON format. If the -
-json option is not specified, the application attempts to import from an INI file. If the import fails, an error is
displayed.


kesl-control --list-certificates

This command outputs a list of trusted root certificates.

Command syntax

                                                            592
kesl-control [-N] --list-certificates


kesl-control --add-certificate

This command adds a certificate to the list of trusted root certificates.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-N] --add-certificate < path to certificate >

Arguments and keys

< path to certificate > is the path to the certificate file that you want to add (PEM or DER format).



kesl-control --remove-certificate

This command removes a certificate from the list of trusted root certificates.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-N] --remove-certificate < certificate subject >



Statistics commands
-S is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the statistics command group.


kesl-control --app-info

This command outputs information about the application.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-S] --app-info [--json]

Arguments and keys

--json is specified to output the settings in JSON format.



kesl-control --get-statistic

The command allows you to display statistics about the operation of the application and the list of mount points
found on the device.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-S] --get-statistic [--files] [--processes] [--mountpoints]

Arguments and keys

                                                        593
[--files]: statistics of files most frequently scanned by the File Threat Protection component, and the number
of times the component accesses these files.

[--processes]: statistics of processes that are most frequently detected by the Kaspersky Endpoint Security
application, and the number of such detections.


  Excluding processes from scanning by the Behavior Detection component does not remove these processes
  from statistics, but it improves the performance of the Kaspersky Endpoint Security application.


[--mountpoints]: list of mount points.

You can specify one or more options in any combination or no options at all. If you do not specify any options, the
application displays three lists: statistics on the most frequently scanned files, statistics on the most frequently
detected processes, and the list of mount points found on the device.

In the output, mount points are sorted as follows:

   Static, system, service and other mount points

   Mounted snap packages and mount points in their namespaces

   Mount points created by the Docker container management system


kesl-control --omsinfo

This command creates a JSON file for integration with Microsoft Operations Management Suite.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-S] --omsinfo --file < file path >



Commands for displaying events

kesl-control -W

This command enables the display of current application events. The command returns the name of the event and
additional information about the event. You can use the command to display all current application events or only
events associated with a currently running task.

Command syntax

kesl-control -W [--query "< filter conditions >"]

Arguments and keys

< filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the logical operator and to output specific current events.




                                                        594
Commands for managing application events
-E: a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands used for managing application events.


kesl-control -E

This command outputs information about all events in the application event log. You can use the less command
to navigate through the list of displayed events.

Command syntax

kesl-control -E


kesl-control -E --query

This command outputs information about events from the application event log. You can use the less command
to navigate through the list of displayed events. You can use a filter to output specific events or output a list of
events to a file.

Command syntax

kesl-control -E --query "< filter conditions >" [--db < database file >] [-n < number >] [--
file < file path >] [--json] [--reverse]

Arguments and keys

< database file > is the full path to the event log database file to output events from. By default, the
application saves information about events to the database at
/var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/storage/events.db. The location of the database is determined by the
EventsStoragePath global application setting.

< filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results.

< number > – number of the latest events of the selection (number of records from the end of the selection) to be
displayed.

--file < file path > is the full path to the file to output events to. If you specify the name of a file without
specifying its path, the file will be created in the current directory. If a file with the specified name already exists
in the specified path, it will be overwritten. If the specified directory cannot be found on the disk, file
will not be created.

If you do not specify the --file option, the list of events will be output to the console.

--json: output events in JSON format.

--reverse: display events in reverse order (from the newest event at the top to the oldest at the bottom).




                                                           595
Commands for managing license keys
-L is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands used to manage license keys.


  Commands for adding and deleting license keys can be run only if the application is being used in standard
  mode. If Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect virtual environments, commands
  for managing license keys finish with an error. You activate the application as part of Kaspersky Security for
  Virtualization Light Agent, and therefore do not need to activate the application separately.



kesl-control --add-active-key

The command lets you add an active license key to the application using a key file or activation code.

You can use this command to add main license keys of the application as well as license keys for additional
functionality. You do not need to specify the type of the key in the command.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-L] --add-active-key < key file path >

kesl-control [-L] --add-active-key < activation code >

Arguments and keys

< path to the key file > – path to the key file. If the key file is located in the current directory, it is sufficient
to specify only the file name.

< activation code > – activation code.

  Example:
  Add a key as an active key from the /home/test/00000001.key file:

  kesl-control --add-active-key /home/test/00000001.key




kesl-control --add-reserve-key

The command lets you add a reserve license key to the application using a key file or an activation code.

You can use this command to add main license keys of the application as well as license keys for additional
functionality. You do not need to specify the type of the key in the command.


  If an active key has not yet been added to the application on the device, the command fails.


Command syntax

kesl-control [-L] --add-reserve-key < key file path >


                                                                      596
kesl-control [-L] --add-reserve-key < activation code >

Arguments and keys

< path to the key file > – path to the key file. If the key file is located in the current directory, it is sufficient
to specify only the file name.

< activation code > – activation code.

  Example:
  Add a reserve key using the /home/test/00000002.key file:

  kesl-control --add-reserve-key /home/test/00000002.key




kesl-control --remove-active-key

This command lets you remove an active license key.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-L] --remove-active-key [--edr-optimum]

kesl-control [-L] --remove-active-key [--kuma]

Arguments and keys

--edr-optimum – delete the active EDR Optimum license key.

--kuma – remove the active KUMA license key.

If you do not specify the --edr-optimum or --kuma option, the main active key is removed.



kesl-control --remove-reserve-key

This command lets you remove a reserve license key.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-L] --remove-reserve-key [--edr-optimum]

kesl-control [-L] --remove-reserve-key [--kuma]

Arguments and keys

--edr-optimum – delete the reserve EDR Optimum license key.

--kuma – remove the reserve KUMA license key.

If you do not specify the --edr-optimum or --kuma option, the main reserve key is removed.




                                                              597
kesl-control -L --query

The -L --query command outputs information about the license that was used for activating the application
and license keys currently in use.

Command syntax

kesl-control -L --query [--json]

Arguments and keys

--json: output data in JSON format.


kesl-control --load-mdr-blob

The --load-mdr-blob command uploads the BLOB file required for integration with Kaspersky Managed
Detection and Response. You can find the BLOB file in the ZIP archive of the MDR configuration file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-L] --load-mdr-blob < path to MDR BLOB file >



kesl-control --remove-mdr-blob

The --remove-mdr-blob command removes the BLOB file required for integration with Kaspersky Managed
Detection and Response.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-L] --remove-mdr-blob



Commands for Firewall Management
-F: a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the firewall management commands.


kesl-control --add-rule

This command adds a new network packet rule.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-F] --add-rule [--name < rule name >] [--action < action >] [--protocol
< protocol >] [--direction < direction >] [--remote < remote address >[:< port range >]] [--
local < local address >[:< port range >]] [--at < index >]

Arguments and keys

--name < rule name > is the name of the network packet rule.


                                                    598
--action < action > is the action to be performed on connections specified in network packet rule.

--protocol < protocol > is the type of data transfer protocol for which you want to monitor network activity.

--direction < direction > is the direction of the monitored network activity.

--remote < remote address >[:< port range >]: the network address of the remote device.

--local < local address >[:< port range >]: the network address of the device with Kaspersky Endpoint
Security installed.

--at < index >: the number of the rule in the list of network packet rules. If the --at option is not specified or its
value is larger than the number of rules in the list, the new rule is added to the end of the list.

Parameters that you do not specify values for in the command are set to their default values.


kesl-control --del-rule

This command deletes the network packet rule with the specified name or index in the list of rules.

Command syntax

kesl-control -F --del-rule --name < rule name >

kesl-control [-F] --del-rule --index < index >

Arguments and keys

--name < rule name > is the name of the network packet rule.

--index < index >: the number of the rule in the list of network packet rules.


kesl-control --move-rule

This command changes the execution priority of a network packet rule.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-F] --move-rule --name < rule name > --at < index >

kesl-control [-F] --move-rule --index < index > --at < index >

Arguments and keys

--name < rule name > is the name of the network packet rule.

--index < index >: the current number of the rule in the list of network packet rules.

--at < index >: the new number of the rule in the list of network packet rules.




                                                        599
kesl-control --add-zone

This command adds an address to a network zone.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-F] --add-zone --zone < zone > --address < address >

Arguments and keys

--zone < zone > is the predefined name of the network zone.

--address < address > is the network address or subnet.



kesl-control --del-zone

This command removes an address from a network zone.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-F] --del-zone --zone < zone > --address < address >

kesl-control [-F] --del-zone --zone < zone > --index < address index >

Arguments and keys

--zone < zone > is the predefined name of the network zone.

--address < address > is the network address or subnet.

--index < address index >: the number of the address in the network zone.



kesl-control -F --query

This command displays firewall rules created with Kaspersky Endpoint Security.

Command syntax

kesl-control -F --query



Commands used to manage blocked devices
-H is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing devices blocked by
Anti-Cryptor and Network Threat Protection.


The kesl-control --get-blocked-hosts command

The command allows you to output the list of blocked devices to the console.


                                                      600
Command syntax

kesl-control [-H] --get-blocked-hosts


The kesl-control --allow-hosts command

The command allows you to unblock blocked devices.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-H] --allow-hosts < address >

Arguments and keys

< address > is an IP address of the device or subnet (IPv4/IPv6, including addresses in short form). You can
specify multiple IP addresses of devices or subnets by separating them with a space.



Commands for managing Device Control
-D is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands to manage Device Control.


kesl-control --get-device-list

The command outputs to the console a list of devices that are installed on a client device or connected to it.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-D] --get-device-list [--json]

Arguments and keys

--json: output data in JSON format.



Commands for managing Application Control
-A is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands to manage Application Control.


kesl-control --get-app-list

The command outputs a list of applications found on a client device by the Inventory task.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-A] --get-app-list [--json]

Arguments and keys


                                                       601
--json: output data in JSON format.


kesl-control --get-categories

This command outputs a list of created application control categories.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-A] --get-categories [--names < name of category 1 > < name of category 2 >
... < name of category N >] [--file < path to configuration file >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

< name of category 1 > < name of category 2 > ... < name of category N > – names of the categories
whose information you want to view. If you want to view information about several categories, specify the names
of the categories, separated by a space.

--file < path to configuration file > – full path to the JSON configuration file to which the settings will
be output.

--json: output data in JSON format.


kesl-control --set-categories

This command lets you create or edit the list of created Application Control categories.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-A] --set-categories [--names < name of category 1 > < name of category 2 >
... < name of category N >] --file < path to configuration file >

Arguments and keys

< name of category 1 > < name of category 2 > ... < name of category N > – names of the categories
whose information you want to change. If you want to change information about several categories, specify the
names of the categories, separated by a space. If you do not specify a category name, the category will be
removed from the list.

--file < path to configuration file > – full path to the configuration file with the category settings.



kesl-control --get-settings 21

This command outputs a list of created application control rules.

Command syntax

kesl-control --get-settings 21 [--file < path to configuration file >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < path to configuration file > – full path to the configuration file to which the settings will be
exported.
                                                       602
--json: output data in JSON format.


kesl-control --set-settings 21

This command lets you edit the list of created application categories and Application Control rules.

Command syntax

kesl-control --set-settings 21 [--file < path to configuration file >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < path to configuration file > – full path to the configuration file from which the settings will be
imported.

--json – import data from a JSON file.



kesl-control --set-to-default 21

This command lets you delete a list of application categories and Application Control rules.

Command syntax

kesl-control --set-settings 21 --set-to-default



Web Control management commands

kesl-control --get-settings 26

This command lets you display the list of specified Web Control settings.

Command syntax

kesl-control --get-settings 26 [--file < path to configuration file >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < path to configuration file > – full path to the configuration file to which the settings will be
exported.

--json: output data in JSON format.



kesl-control --set-settings 26

This command lets you edit the list of specified Web Control settings.

Command syntax


                                                       603
kesl-control --set-settings 26 [--file < path to configuration file >] [--json]

Arguments and keys

--file < path to configuration file > – full path to the configuration file from which the settings will be
imported.

--json – import data from a JSON file.



kesl-control --set-to-default 26

This command lets you delete specified settings and reset Web Control settings to the default rule.

Command syntax

kesl-control --set-settings 26 --set-to-default



Commands for managing Backup
-B is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands used to manage the Backup storage.


kesl-control -B --mass-remove

The command deletes some or all objects from Backup.

Command syntax

Delete all objects:

kesl-control -B --mass-remove

Delete objects that match the filter conditions:

kesl-control -B --mass-remove --query "< filter conditions >"

Arguments and keys

< filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results.



kesl-control -B --query

This command outputs information about Backup objects.

Command syntax

Output information about all objects in Backup:

kesl-control -B --query [-n < number >] [--json] [--reverse]

                                                      604
Output information about Backup objects that match the filter conditions:

kesl-control -B --query ["< filter conditions >"] [-n < number >] [--json] [--reverse]

Arguments and keys

< filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results. If you do not specify any filter
conditions, the application will display the details of all objects in Backup.

< number >: the number of the most recent objects to display. If you do not specify the -n switch, the last 30
objects will be displayed. To display all objects, specify 0.

--json: output data in JSON format.

--reverse – output objects in reverse order (from the newest object at the top to the oldest at the bottom).


kesl-control -B --restore

This command restores an object from Backup.

Command syntax

kesl-control -B --restore < object ID > [--file < file path >]

Arguments and keys

< object ID >: the ID of the Backup object.

--file < file path >: the new name of the file and the path to the directory to save it to. If you do not specify
the --file option, the object will be restored with its original name and to its original location.



Commands for managing the Quarantine
-Q is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands used to manage the Quarantine.


kesl-control -Q --mass-remove

The command deletes some or all files from Quarantine.

Command syntax

Delete all files:

kesl-control -Q --mass-remove

Delete files that match the filter conditions:

kesl-control -Q --mass-remove --query "< filter conditions >"

Arguments and keys
                                                        605
< filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results.


kesl-control --put


  This command is available only when Kaspersky Endpoint Security is integrated with Kaspersky Endpoint
  Detection and Response Optimum.


The command allows to quarantine a file.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-Q] --put < file path > [--md5] [--sha256] [--save-original-file]

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the file that you want to quarantine.

--md5 is the MD5 hash of the file that you want to quarantine.

--sha256 is the SHA256 hash of the file that you want to quarantine.

--save-original-file keeps the original file. If you do not specify this option, the original file is deleted.


kesl-control -Q --query

This command outputs information about quarantined files.

Command syntax

Output information about all quarantined files:

kesl-control -Q --query [-n < number >] [--json]

Display information about quarantined files that match filter conditions:

kesl-control -Q --query ["< filter conditions >"] [-n < number >]

Arguments and keys

< filter conditions >: one or several logical expressions in the format < field > < comparison operator >
'< value >', combined with the help of the logical operator and to limit the results. If you do not specify any filter
conditions, the application will display the details of all quarantined files.

< number > is the number of the most recent quarantined files that you want to display. If you do not specify the -
n option, the last 30 files are displayed. To display all files, specify 0.

--json: output data in JSON format.




                                                        606
kesl-control -Q --restore

The command lets you restore a file from quarantine.

Command syntax

kesl-control -Q --restore < file ID > [--file < file path >]

Arguments and keys

< file ID >: the ID of the quarantined file.

--file < file path >: the new name of the file and the path to the directory to save it to. If you do not specify
the --file option, the file will be restored with its original name and to its original location. If the directory is
deleted or the user does not have access rights to it, the application places the file in the
/var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/restored/ directory. You can manually move the file from this directory to the
directory of your choice.



Commands for managing users and roles
The -U prefix indicates that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing users and roles.


kesl-control --get-user-list

This command outputs a list of users and roles.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-U] --get-user-list


kesl-control --grant-role

This command assigns a role to a specific user.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-U] --grant-role < role > < user >


kesl-control --revoke-role

This command revokes a role from a specific user.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-U] --revoke-role < role > < user >




                                                        607
Commands for managing EDR (KATA) / NDR (KATA) component
settings
-R is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing the settings of
integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) and Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response Optimum components and the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum solution.


kesl-control --add-kataedr-server-certificate; kesl-control --add-katandr-server-certificate

These commands add or replace a previously added KATA/NDR server certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --add-kataedr-server-certificate < file path>

kesl-control [-R] --add-katandr-server-certificate < file path>

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the file containing the server certificate.



kesl-control --remove-kataedr-server-certificate; kesl-control --remove-katandr-server-
certificate

These commands remove a KATA/NDR server certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --remove-kataedr-server-certificate

kesl-control [-R] --remove-katandr-server-certificate



kesl-control --query-kataedr-server-certificate; kesl-control --query-katandr-server-
certificate

These commands output information about a KATA/NDR server certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --query-kataedr-server-certificate

kesl-control [-R] --query-katandr-server-certificate




                                                        608
kesl-control --add-kataedr-client-certificate; kesl-control --add-katandr-client-certificate

These commands add or replace a previously added client certificate used to secure the connection to a
KATA/NDR server.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --add-kataedr-client-certificate < file path >

kesl-control [-R] --add-katandr-client-certificate < file path >

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate and private key.


kesl-control --remove-kataedr-client-certificate; kesl-control --remove-katandr-client-
certificate

These commands delete the client certificate used to secure the connection to a KATA/NDR server.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --remove-kataedr-client-certificate

kesl-control [-R] --remove-katandr-client-certificate


kesl-control --query-kataedr-client-certificate; kesl-control --query-katandr-client-certificate

These commands output information about a client certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --query-kataedr-client-certificate

kesl-control [-R] --query-katandr-client-certificate



Commands for managing device network isolation
-R is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing the settings of
integration with the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response (KATA) and Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
Response Optimum components and the Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and Response Optimum solution. Network
isolation of devices is applied as a response action on threat detection when integrated with the specified
Detection and Response solutions.


kesl-control --isolation-stat

This command outputs the current state of network isolation to the console: enabled or disabled.

Command syntax

                                                       609
kesl-control [-R] --isolation-stat


kesl-control --isolation-off

This command lets you disable network isolation of a device.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-R] --isolation-off



Commands for managing the KUMA integration settings
-M is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing Kaspersky Unified
Monitoring and Analysis Platform settings.


kesl-control --add-kuma-server-certificate

This command adds or replaces a previously added KUMA server certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-M] --add-kuma-server-certificate < path to file>

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the file containing the server certificate.



kesl-control --remove-kuma-server-certificate

This command removes a KUMA server certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-M] --remove-kuma-server-certificate


kesl-control --query-kuma-server-certificate

This command outputs information about a KUMA server certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-M] --query-kuma-server-certificate


kesl-control --add-kuma-client-certificate

This command adds or replaces a previously added client certificate used to secure the connection to a KUMA
server.
                                                        610
Command syntax

kesl-control [-M] --add-kuma-client-certificate < file path >

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate and private key.


kesl-control --remove-kuma-client-certificate

This command deletes the client certificate used to secure the connection to a KUMA server.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-M] --remove-kuma-client-certificate


kesl-control --query-kuma-client-certificate

The command outputs information about a client certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-M] --query-kuma-client-certificate



Commands for managing the KATA Sandbox integration settings
-X is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing the KATA Sandbox
integration settings.


kesl-control --add-sandbox-server-certificate

This command adds or replaces a previously added certificate of the Central Node server responsible for
interaction with KATA Sandbox.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-X] --add-sandbox-server-certificate < file path>

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the file containing the server certificate.


kesl-control --remove-sandbox-server-certificate

This command removes the certificate of the Central Node server responsible for interaction with KATA Sandbox.

Command syntax


                                                        611
kesl-control [-X] --remove-sandbox-server-certificate


kesl-control --query-sandbox-server-certificate

This command displays information about the certificate of the Central Node server responsible for interaction
with KATA Sandbox.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-X] --query-sandbox-server-certificate


kesl-control --add-sandbox-client-certificate

This command adds or replaces a previously added client certificate used to secure the connection to the Central
Node server responsible for interaction with KATA Sandbox.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-X] --add-sandbox-client-certificate < file path >

Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the cryptocontainer (PFX archive) containing the client certificate and private key.


kesl-control --remove-sandbox-client-certificate

This command removes a client certificate used to secure the connection to the Central Node server responsible
for interaction with KATA Sandbox.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-X] --remove-sandbox-client-certificate


kesl-control --query-sandbox-client-certificate

The command outputs information about a client certificate.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-X] --query-sandbox-client-certificate


kesl-control --sandbox

This command sends files for scanning to KATA Sandbox.

Command syntax

kesl-control [-X] --sandbox < file path 1> < file path 2>


                                                       612
Arguments and keys

< file path > is the path to the file or directory that you want to scan. You can specify multiple paths by
separating them with a space.



Commands for managing IOC scans
-T is a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of commands for managing application settings
and tasks.


kesl-control --scan-ioc

The command starts a search for indicators of compromise on a device (IOC).

Command syntax

kesl-control [-T] --scan-ioc --path < path to directory or file > [--process on|off] [--
hint < regular expression >] [--arpentry on|off] [--ports on|off] [--system on|off] [--
files on|off] [--drives all|system|critical|custom] [--excludes < list of exclusions >] [-
-scope < list of directories >] [--action
Skip|QuarantineFile|IsolateHost|ScanCriticalAreas]

Arguments and keys

--path < path to directory or file > – path to IOC file or directory with IOC files with the .IOC or .XML
extension, which should be used to perform the scan.


  You can specify multiple paths by separating them with a space. You can also specify both types of paths
  (path to a file and path to a directory).


--process – enable analysis of processes running on the device.

Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of processes running on the device (default value).

   off – disable analysis of processes running on the device.

If you do not specify the --process option, the application analyzes processes only if the used IOC file specifies
the details of these processes (ProcessItem).

--hint < regular expression > – regular expression that matches the full path to the file (FileItem) or
executable file of the process (ProcessItem) to be analyzed.

You can use the following regular expression elements:

   meta characters: . ^ $ |

   character classes: digit, alpha, lower, upper, cntrl



                                                          613
   quantifiers: * + ? {n} {n,} {n, m}

   negation: [^a-c]

   escaped characters: \a \e \f, \n \r \t \v \b

--arpentry – enable analysis of entries in the ARP table (ArpEntryItem).

Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of entries in the ARP table (default value).

   off – disable analysis of entries in the ARP table.

If you do not specify the --arpentry option, the application analyzes the ARP table only if the used IOC file
specifies the details of the ARP table (ArpEntryItem).

--ports – enable analysis of ports open for connection.

Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of ports open for connection and scan active connections on the device (default value).

   off – disable analysis of ports open for connection and do not scan active connections on the device.

If you do not specify the --ports option, the application only analyzes ports if the used IOC file specifies the
details of these ports (PortItem).

--system – enable analysis of the system environment.

Possible arguments:

   on – enable analysis of the system environment (default value).

   off – disable analysis of the system environment.

If you do not specify the --system option, the application analyzes the system environment only if the used IOC
file specifies details of the system environment (SystemInfoItem).

--files – enable file analysis.

Possible arguments:

   on – enable file analysis (default value).

   off – disable file analysis.

If you do not specify the --files option, the application analyzes files only if the used IOC file specifies the
details of those files (FileItem).

--drives – areas to be scanned.




                                                         614
Possible arguments:

   all – check all available file areas.

   system – scan all files within the root file system.

   critical – scan files in user and system directories (default value).

   custom – scan only files in the areas you specify.

If you do not specify the --drives option, the application analyzes files in user and system directories.

--excludes < list of exclusions > – list of paths excluded from scans.

The exclusions specified by this option are global and are valid regardless of the scope type or directory list. These
exclusions take precedence over other command line options, including --hint and --scope.


  Exclusions are specified as paths, but cannot contain recursive elements or wildcard characters (e.g. *).


If you do not specify the --excludes option, the scan is performed without exclusions.

You can specify multiple exclusions by separating them with a space.

--scope < list of directories > – list of additional directories to be scanned.


  This option is required if you specified the custom argument for the --drives option.


--action – action performed when indicators of compromise are detected.

Possible arguments:

   Skip – the application will not perform any actions with the detected object, but information about it will be
   saved in the task execution results (default value).

   QuarantineFile – the application will quarantine the detected object.

   IsolateHost – the application imposes network isolation on the device on which the object is detected.

   ScanCriticalAreas – the application will perform scan critical areas.


         /lib/systemd

         /lib/udev

         /lib/dbus-1.0

         /usr/local/lib/systemd/user

         /usr/share/dbus-1

         /usr/share/gdm/autostart
                                                          615
        /usr/share/gnome/autostart

        /var/spool/at

        /var/spool/at/spool

        /var/spool/anacron

        /var/spool/cron

        /boot

        /bin

        /sbin

        /lib

        /lib32

        /lib64

        /libx32

        /usr/lib

        /usr/lib32

        /usr/lib64

        /usr/libx32

        ~/.config/autostart

        ~/.config/autostart-scripts

        ~/.config/plasma-workspace/env

        ~/.config/plasma-workspace/shutdown

        ~/.config/lxsession

        ~/.fluxbox/startup

        ~/.kde/Autostart

        /etc


You can specify multiple actions by separating them with commas.


  If you specify the Skip argument, do not add any other arguments. The Skip argument can only be used on
  its own.



                                                    616
Application commands in Light Agent mode for protecting virtual
environments
-V: a prefix indicating that the command belongs to the group of Kaspersky Endpoint Security commands used in
Light Agent mode for protecting virtual environments (as part of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light
Agent).


  The commands can be executed only if Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in Light Agent mode to protect
  virtual environments.



kesl-control --ksvla-info

This command outputs information about using the application in Light Agent mode for protecting virtual
environments:

Command syntax

kesl-control --ksvla-info


kesl-control --viis-info

This command outputs information about the connection of Light Agent (Kaspersky Endpoint Security used as a
Light Agent as part of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent) to the Integration Server:

Command syntax

kesl-control --viis-info


kesl-control --svm-info

This command outputs information about the connection of Light Agent (Kaspersky Endpoint Security used as a
Light Agent as part of Kaspersky Security for Virtualization Light Agent) to an SVM:

Command syntax

kesl-control --svm-info



Commands for managing system performance metrics

kesl-control --export-metrics

This command allows to configure the obtaining of operating system performance metrics.

Command syntax
                                                     617
kesl-control [-J] --export-metrics [--period < interval in seconds between exports >|--
interactive]

Arguments and keys

--period enables periodic output of results.

< interval in seconds between exports > (in seconds) sets the output period.

--interactive enables interactive output (on the Enter key being pressed).




Appendix 3. Configuration files and default application
settings
The following configuration files are used for managing Kaspersky Endpoint Security:

   Configuration files that contain the initial configuration settings of the application:

      autoinstall.ini configuration file, used when installing the application via Kaspersky Security Center.

      Configuration file used when installing the application via the command line.

   Preset configuration files generated automatically during the initial configuration of the application and
   containing the options set during the initial configuration. These settings are applied at run time.

   Configuration files that you can create with Kaspersky Endpoint Security management commands. These
   configuration files may contain task settings and other application settings. You can modify these files and
   import into the application to modify the corresponding options.




Rules for editing application task configuration files
When editing a configuration file, adhere to the following rules:

   Specify all mandatory settings in the configuration file. You can specify individual task settings without a file
   using the command line.

   If a setting belongs to a certain section, specify it only in this section. You can specify the settings in any order
   within the one section.

   Enclose the names of sections in square brackets [ ].

   Enter the values of settings in the format < setting name >=< setting value > (spaces between the a
   setting name and its value are not processed).
     Example:
     [ScanScope.item_0000]
     AreaDesc=Home
     AreaMask.item_0000=*doc
     Path=/home




                                                         618
   Space and tab characters are ignored before the first quotation mark and after the last quotation mark
   of a string value, and at the beginning and end of a string value that is not enclosed in quotation marks.

   If you need to specify several values for a setting, repeat the setting the same number of times as the number
   of values that you want to specify.
     Example:
     AreaMask.item_0000=*xml
     AreaMask.item_0001=*doc



   Be case-sensitive when entering values for the following types of settings:

      Names (masks) of scanned objects and excluded objects.

      Names (masks) of threats.

   The remaining setting values are not case-sensitive.

   Specify Boolean setting values as follows: Yes / No.

   Use quotation marks to enclose string values containing a space character (for example, names of files and
   directories and their paths, expressions containing the date and time in the format "YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS").
   You can enter the remaining values with or without quotation marks.
     Example:
     AreaDesc=" Scanning of email databases "




     A single quotation mark in the beginning or end of a string is considered an error.




Preset configuration files
After the initial configuration, the application creates the following configuration files:

   /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/agreements.ini
   The agreements.ini configuration file contains settings related to the License Agreement, Privacy Policy, and
   Kaspersky Security Network Statement.

   /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/kesl.ini
   The kesl.ini configuration file contains the settings described in the following table.

If necessary, you can edit the values of the settings in these files.


  The default values in these files should be changed only under the supervision of Technical Support specialists
  and in accordance with their instructions.




                                                          619
Settings of the kesl.ini configuration file

                   Setting                                      Description                                                Values

   The [General] section contains the following settings:

   Locale                                     The locale used for the localization of texts      The locale in the format specified by RFC 3066.
                                              sent by Kaspersky Endpoint Security to             If the Locale setting is not specified, the operating
                                              Kaspersky Security Center (events,
                                                                                                 system locale is used. If the application fails to
                                              notifications, task results, etc.).
                                                                                                 determine the operating system localization language or
                                              The locale of the graphical interface and the      the operating system localization is not supported, the
                                              application command line depends on the            default value will be used – en_US.utf8 .
                                              value of the LANG environment variable. If the
                                              locale that is not supported by Kaspersky
                                              Endpoint Security is specified as the value of
                                              the LANG environment variable, the graphical
                                              interface and the command line are displayed
                                              in English.

   PackageType                                Format of the installed application package.       rpm – an RPM package is installed.
                                              We do not recommend changing the value of          deb – a DEB package is installed.
                                              this setting manually. This value is filled in
                                              automatically during initial application
                                              configuration.

   UseFanotify                                Using the fanotify technology to intercept file    true/yes – the application uses the fanotify
                                              operations.                                        technology to intercept file operations.
                                              We do not recommend changing the value of          false/no – the fanotify technology is not used.
                                              this setting manually. This setting is specified
                                              during the initial configuration of the
                                              application.

   KsvlaMode                                  Kaspersky Endpoint Security usage mode.            true/yes – the application is used in Light Agent
                                              We do not recommend changing the value of          mode to protect virtual environments.
                                              this setting manually. This setting is specified   false/no – the application is used in Standard mode.
                                              during the initial configuration of the
                                              application.

   StartupTraces                              Enables generation of trace files at application   true/yes – Create trace files at application startup.
                                              startup.
                                                                                                 false/no (default value) – Do not create trace files at
                                                                                                 application startup.

   RevealSensitiveInfoInTraces                Display information in trace files that may        true/yes (default value) — display information in
                                              contain personal data (for example,                application trace files that may contain personal data.
                                              passwords).
                                                                                                 false/no (default value) — do not display information
                                                                                                 that may contain personal data in trace files.

   AsyncTraces                                Enables asynchronous tracing, in which             true/yes – enable asynchronous tracing.
                                              information is logged to trace files in
                                                                                                 false/no (default value) – do not enable
                                              asynchronously.
                                                                                                 asynchronous tracing.

   CoreDumps                                  Enables the creation of a dump file when           true/yes – Create a dump file when the application
                                              application failure occurs.                        crashes.
                                                                                                 false/no (default value) – Do not create a dump file
                                                                                                 when the application crashes.

   CoreDumpsPath                              Path to the directory where the dump files are     Default value: /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/dumps.
                                              stored.                                            Root privileges are required to access the default dump
                                                                                                 file directory.

   MinFreeDiskSpace                           The minimum amount of disk memory that will        Default value: 300.
                                              remain after writing a dump file, in megabytes.

   ScanMemoryLimit                            Limit on the application's use of memory in        Default value: 8192.
                                              megabytes.

                                                                                                    We recommend specifying a ScanMemoryLimit
                                                                                                    lower than the MaxMemory setting to avoid using
                                                                                                    up all available memory for scan tasks and causing
                                                                                                    an application restart.



   MachineId                                  The user's unique device ID.                       The value of the setting is filled in automatically during
                                                                                                 installation of the application.


                                                                             620
              Setting                                       Description                                             Values

SocketPath                               Path to a socket for a remote connection to,      Default value: /var/run/bl4control.
                                         say, a graphical interface and the kesl-control
                                         utility.

MaxInotifyWatches                        Limit on the number of subscriptions to           Default value: 300000.
                                         changes in files and directories (user watches)
                                         in /proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_user_watches.

MaxInotifyInstances                      Limit on the number of subscriptions to           Default value: 2048.
                                         changes in files and directories for a single
                                         user.

ExecEnvMax                               The number of environment variables that the      Default value: 50.
                                         application captures from the command call.

ExecArgMax                               Number of arguments that the application          Default value: 20.
                                         captures from the exec call.

AdditionalDNSLookup                      Indicates use of a public DNS.                    true/yes – Use a public DNS to access Kaspersky
                                         If there are errors accessing servers through     servers.
                                         the system DNS, the application uses a public     false/no (default value) – Do not use a public DNS to
                                         DNS. This is needed for updating application      access Kaspersky servers.
                                         databases and maintaining device security.
                                         The application will use the following public
                                         DNSes in this order:                                 The application's requests may contain domain
                                            1. Google Public DNS™ (8.8.8.8).                  addresses and the user's external IP address,
                                                                                              since the application establishes a TCP/UDP
                                           2. Cloudflare® DNS (1.1.1.1).
                                                                                              connection with the DNS server. This information
                                           3. Alibaba Cloud® DNS (223.6.6.6).                 is necessary, for example, to check the certificate
                                           4. Quad9® DNS (9.9.9.9).                           of a web resource when interacting via HTTPS. If
                                                                                              the application is using a public DNS server, data
                                           5. CleanBrowsing (185.228.168.168).                processing rules are governed by the Privacy
                                                                                              Policy of the corresponding service.




The [Network] section contains the following settings:

WtpFwMark                                A mark in the iptables rules for forwarding       A decimal value or hexadecimal number with the prefix
                                         traffic to the application for processing by      0x.
                                         Web Threat Protection component. You may
                                                                                           Default value: 0x100.
                                         need to change this mark if a device with the
                                         application runs other software that uses the
                                         ninth bit of the TCP packet mask, and a
                                         conflict occurs.

NtpFwMark                                A mark in the iptables rules for forwarding       A decimal value or hexadecimal number with the prefix
                                         traffic to the application for processing by      0x.
                                         Network Threat Protection component.
                                                                                           Default value: 0x200.
                                         You may need to change this mark if a device
                                         with the application runs other software that
                                         uses the ninth bit of the TCP packet mask, and
                                         a conflict occurs.

BypassFwMark                             A mark used to indicate packets created or        A decimal value or hexadecimal number with the prefix
                                         scanned by the application, so that the           0x.
                                         application does not scan them again.             Default value: 0x400.

BypassNFlogMark                          A mark used to indicate packages created or       A decimal value or hexadecimal number with the prefix
                                         scanned by the application to prevent them        0x.
                                         from being logged by the iptable utility.         Default value: 0x800.

ProxyRouteTable                          Number of the routing table.                      Default value: 101.

The [ScannerImpactStats] section contains the following settings:

CollectFileScanStatistics                Enables the counting of file and process          true/yes (default value) enables the tallying of file
                                         scanning statistics by the application.           and process scanning statistics.
                                                                                           false/no disables the tallying of file and process
                                                                                           scanning statistics.




                                                                           621
               Setting                                      Description                                                  Values

StatCollectionPeriod                      The time period during which the application       Default value: 10 minutes.
                                          collects statistics of scanned files and
                                          detected processes before saving the
                                          statistical information to the trace file and
                                          reports.

StatCollectionCount                       The number of scanned files and detected           Default value: 10.
                                          processes counted by the application during
                                          the time interval specified by the
                                           StatCollectionPeriod parameter and that
                                          is included in the report and trace files.

ReportStatAmount                          The number of records to be written to             Default value: 20.
                                          reports on the most frequently scanned files
                                          and processes for the day.

The [Virtualization] section contains the following settings:

ServerMode                                The role of the protected virtual machine on       true/yes – the protected virtual machine is used as a
                                          which Kaspersky Endpoint Security is used in       server.
                                          Light Agent mode to protect virtual
                                                                                             false/no – the protected virtual machine is used as a
                                          environments: server or workstation.
                                                                                             workstation.
                                          We do not recommend changing the value of
                                          this setting manually. This setting is specified
                                          during the initial configuration of the
                                          application.

VdiMode                                   Enables VDI protection mode when using the         true/yes – VDI protection mode is enabled.
                                          application in Light Agent mode to protect
                                                                                             false/no – VDI protection mode is disabled.
                                          virtual environments.
                                          We do not recommend changing the value of
                                          this setting manually. This setting is specified
                                          during the initial configuration of the
                                          application.

The [Watchdog] section contains the following settings:

TimeoutAfterHeadshot                      Maximum time to wait for the kesl process to       Default value: 2 minutes.
                                          complete from the moment the Watchdog
                                          server sends the HEADSHOT signal to the kesl
                                          process.

StartupTimeout                            The maximum time to wait for the application       Default value: 3 minutes.
                                          to start (in minutes), after which the
                                          Watchdog server starts the procedure for
                                          restarting the kesl process.

TimeoutAfterKill                          Maximum time to wait for the controlled kesl       Default value: 2 days.
                                          process to complete from the moment the
                                          Watchdog server sends the SIGKILL signal to
                                          the kesl process.
                                          If the kesl process does not finish before this
                                          time elapses, the action specified by the --
                                          failed-kill setting is performed.

PingInterval                              The interval with which the application            Default value: 2000 milliseconds.
                                          attempts to send a PONG message to the
                                          Watchdog server in response to a received
                                          PING message.

MaxRestartCount                           Maximum number of consecutive                      Default value: 5.
                                          unsuccessful attempts to start the
                                          application.

ActivityTimeout                           Maximum time interval during which the             Default value: 2 minutes.
                                          application should send a message to the
                                          Watchdog server.
                                          If a message is not received from the
                                          application within this time interval, the
                                          Watchdog server begins the procedure to
                                          restart the kesl process.




                                                                       622
            Setting                       Description                                                 Values

ConnectTimeout          Maximum time from the start of the kesl           Default value: 3 minutes.
                        process to the moment when a connection
                        with the Watchdog server is established by
                        the application.
                        If the application does not establish a
                        connection in this time interval, the Watchdog
                        server begins the procedure to restart the kesl
                        process.

RegisterTimeout         Maximum time from the moment the                  Default value: 500 milliseconds.
                        application connects to the Watchdog server
                        to the moment the server receives a
                        REGISTER message.

TimeoutAfterShutdown    Maximum time to wait for the kesl process to      Default value: 2 minutes.
                        complete from the moment the Watchdog
                        server sends the SHUTDOWN signal to the
                        kesl process.

MaxMemory               Limit on the use of resident memory by the        off – the resident set size is not limited.
                        kesl process.
                                                                          < value >% – a value between 1 and 100, expressing a
                        If the kesl process uses more resident memory     percentage of memory.
                        than this limit, the Watchdog server begins the
                                                                          < value >MB – a value in megabytes.
                        procedure to restart the kesl process.
                                                                          lowest/< value >%/< value >MB – the smaller value
                                                                          between the value as a percentage and the value in
                                                                          megabytes.
                                                                          highest/< value >%/< value >MB – the larger value
                                                                          between the value as a percentage and the value in
                                                                          megabytes.
                                                                          auto – up to 50% of available memory, but not less
                                                                          than 2GB and not more than 16GB.
                                                                          Default value: auto .

MaxVirtualMemory        Limit on the use of virtual memory by the kesl     off (default value) – The virtual memory size is not
                        process.                                          limited.
                        If the kesl process uses more virtual memory      < value >MB – a value in megabytes.
                        than this limit, the Watchdog server begins the
                        procedure to restart the kesl process.

MaxSwapMemory           Limit on the size of the swap file of the kesl     off (default value) – The size of the swap file is not
                        process.                                          limited.
                        If the swap file of the kesl process exceeds      < value >% – a value between 0 and 100, expressing a
                        this limit, the Watchdog server begins the        percentage of memory.
                        procedure to restart the kesl process.
                                                                          < value >MB – a value in megabytes.
                                                                          lowest/< value >%/< value >MB – the smaller value
                                                                          between the value as a percentage and the value in
                                                                          megabytes.
                                                                          highest/< value >%/< value >MB – the larger value
                                                                          between the value as a percentage and the value in
                                                                          megabytes.

TrackProductCrashes     Enabling application stability monitoring.        true/yes – enable application stability monitoring.
                        If application stability monitoring is enabled,   false/no (default value) – disable application stability
                        the Watchdog server tracks the number of          monitoring.
                        abnormal halts of the application.

ProductHealthLogFile    The path to the file used for application         Default value:
                        stability monitoring.                             /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/kesl_health.log.

WarnThreshold           Time interval (in seconds) in which the           Default value: 3600 seconds.
                        application must experience the specified
                        number of abnormal halts before displaying a
                        notification about unstable operation.

WarnAfter_#_crash       Number of abnormal halts of the application       Default value: 10.
                        that are required before displaying a             If the value is 0, an unstable application notification is
                        notification about unstable application
                                                                          not displayed.
                        operation.

WarnRemovingThreshold   Time interval (in seconds) after which the        Default value: 86400 seconds.
                        application's unstable status will be cleared.


                                                     623
                 Setting                                      Description                                                 Values

  SyscallHangProbePeriod                    The period with which the Watchdog server         Default value: 3 seconds.
                                            calls the open and execve system functions
                                            and increments the success counters for
                                            these functions.

  SyscallHangCheckPeriod                    The period with which the Watchdog server         Default value: 12 seconds.
                                            checks the success counters for the open and
                                            execve functions.
                                            If the value of the counters is unchanged after
                                            this time, the Watchdog server starts the
                                            procedure for restarting the kesl process.

  DumpSupendPeriod                          The maximum time to wait for the creation of      Possible values: 1–30 minutes.
                                            an application dump file, during which the        Default value: 2 minutes.
                                            Watchdog server suspends the checking of
                                            application activity.
                                            If the dump creation has not completed after
                                            this time, the Watchdog server starts the
                                            procedure for restarting the kesl process.

  By default, the [Environment] section is absent from the configuration file.

  ExperimentalContainerdSupport             Enabling support for the containerd               true/yes – enable support for the containerd
                                            environment when running the Container            environment in the operation of the Container
                                            Monitoring component.                             Monitoring component.
                                            By default, this section is absent from the       false/no – do not enable support for the containerd
                                            configuration file. If you want to use the        environment in the operation of the Container
                                            containerd environment when the Container         Monitoring component.
                                            Monitoring component is running, you need to
                                            manually add the [Environment] section to
                                            the configuration file and inside it, the
                                            ExperimentalContainerdSupport setting.




Default settings for command line tasks
This section contains the default options for all predefined tasks that are provided for managing Kaspersky
Endpoint Security via the command line.


  The Rollback and License tasks have no settings.




Default settings for the File_Threat_Protection task (ID:1)
ScanArchived=No

ScanSfxArchived=No

ScanMailBases=No

ScanPlainMail=No

SkipPlainTextFiles=No

TimeLimit=60

SizeLimit=0


                                                                        624
FirstAction=Recommended

SecondAction=Block

UseExcludeMasks=No

UseExcludeThreats=No

ReportCleanObjects=No

ReportPackedObjects=No

ReportUnprocessedObjects=No

UseAnalyzer=Yes

HeuristicLevel=Recommended

UseIChecker=Yes

ScanByAccessType=SmartCheck

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=All objects

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=/

AreaMask.item_0000=*



Default settings for the Scan_My_Computer task (ID:2)
ScanFiles=Yes

ScanBootSectors=Yes

ScanComputerMemory=Yes

ScanStartupObjects=Yes

ScanArchived=Yes

ScanSfxArchived=Yes

ScanMailBases=No

ScanPlainMail=No

TimeLimit=0

SizeLimit=0
                                  625
FirstAction=Recommended

SecondAction=Skip

UseExcludeMasks=No

UseExcludeThreats=No

ReportCleanObjects=No

ReportPackedObjects=No

ReportUnprocessedObjects=No

UseAnalyzer=Yes

HeuristicLevel=Recommended

UseIChecker=Yes

UseGlobalExclusions=Yes

UseOASExclusions=Yes

DeviceNameMasks.item_0000=/**

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=All objects

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=/

AreaMask.item_0000=*



Default settings for the Scan_File task (ID:3)
ScanFiles=Yes

ScanBootSectors=No

ScanComputerMemory=No

ScanStartupObjects=No

ScanArchived=Yes

ScanSfxArchived=Yes

ScanMailBases=No

ScanPlainMail=No
                                     626
TimeLimit=0

SizeLimit=0

FirstAction=Recommended

SecondAction=Skip

UseExcludeMasks=No

UseExcludeThreats=No

ReportCleanObjects=No

ReportPackedObjects=No

ReportUnprocessedObjects=No

UseAnalyzer=Yes

HeuristicLevel=Recommended

UseIChecker=Yes

UseGlobalExclusions=Yes

UseOASExclusions=Yes

DeviceNameMasks.item_0000=/**

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=All objects

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=/

AreaMask.item_0000=*



Default settings for the Critical_Areas_Scan task (ID:4)
ScanFiles=No

ScanBootSectors=Yes

ScanComputerMemory=Yes

ScanStartupObjects=Yes

ScanArchived=Yes

ScanSfxArchived=Yes
                                    627
ScanMailBases=No

ScanPlainMail=No

TimeLimit=0

SizeLimit=0

FirstAction=Recommended

SecondAction=Skip

UseExcludeMasks=No

UseExcludeThreats=No

ReportCleanObjects=No

ReportPackedObjects=No

ReportUnprocessedObjects=No

UseAnalyzer=Yes

HeuristicLevel=Recommended

UseIChecker=Yes

UseGlobalExclusions=Yes

UseOASExclusions=Yes

DeviceNameMasks.item_0000=/**

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=All objects

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=/

AreaMask.item_0000=*



Default settings for the Update task (ID:6)
SourceType=KLServers

UseKLServersWhenUnavailable=Yes

ApplicationUpdateMode=DownloadOnly

ConnectionTimeout=10
                                     628
Default settings for the System_Integrity_Monitoring task (ID:11)
UseExcludeMasks=No

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=Kaspersky internal objects

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=/opt/kaspersky/kesl/

AreaMask.item_0000=*



Default settings for the Firewall_Management task (ID:12)
DefaultIncomingAction=Allow

DefaultIncomingPacketAction=Allow

OpenNagentPorts=Yes

[NetworkZonesTrusted]

[NetworkZonesLocal]

[NetworkZonesPublic]



Default settings for the Anti_Cryptor task (ID:13)
ActionOnDetect=Block

BlockTime=30

UseExcludeMasks=No

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=All shared directories

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=AllShared

AreaMask.item_0000=*




                                      629
Default settings for the Web_Threat_Protection task (ID:14)
UseTrustedAddresses=Yes

ActionOnDetect=Block

CheckMalicious=Yes

CheckPhishing=Yes

UseHeuristicForPhishing=Yes

CheckAdware=No

CheckOther=No



Default settings for the Device_Control task (ID:15)
OperationMode=Block

[DeviceClass]

HardDrive=DependsOnBus

RemovableDrive=DependsOnBus

Printer=DependsOnBus

FloppyDrive=DependsOnBus

OpticalDrive=DependsOnBus

Modem=DependsOnBus

TapeDrive=DependsOnBus

MultifuncDevice=DependsOnBus

SmartCardReader=DependsOnBus

PortableDevice=DependsOnBus

WiFiAdapter=DependsOnBus

NetworkAdapter=DependsOnBus

BluetoothDevice=DependsOnBus

ImagingDevice=DependsOnBus


                                     630
SerialPortDevice=DependsOnBus

ParallelPortDevice=DependsOnBus

InputDevice=DependsOnBus

SoundAdapter=DependsOnBus

[DeviceBus]

USB=Allow

FireWire=Allow

[Schedules.item_0000]

ScheduleName=Default

DaysHours=All

[HardDrivePrincipals.item_0000]

Principal=\Everyone

[HardDrivePrincipals.item_0000.AccessRules.item_0000]

UseRule=Yes

ScheduleName=Default

Access=Allow

[RemovableDrivePrincipals.item_0000]

Principal=\Everyone

[RemovableDrivePrincipals.item_0000.AccessRules.item_0000]

UseRule=Yes

ScheduleName=Default

Access=Allow

[FloppyDrivePrincipals.item_0000]

Principal=\Everyone

[FloppyDrivePrincipals.item_0000.AccessRules.item_0000]

UseRule=Yes

ScheduleName=Default


                                          631
Access=Allow

[OpticalDrivePrincipals.item_0000]

Principal=\Everyone

[OpticalDrivePrincipals.item_0000.AccessRules.item_0000]

UseRule=Yes

ScheduleName=Default

Access=Allow



Default settings for the Removable_Drives_Scan task (ID:16)
ScanRemovableDrives=NoScan

ScanOpticalDrives=NoScan

BlockDuringScan=No



Default settings for the Network_Threat_Protection task (ID:17)
ActionOnDetect=Block

BlockAttackingHosts=Yes

BlockDurationMinutes=60

UseExcludeIPs=No



Default settings for Container_Scan (ID:18) and Custom_Container_Scan
(ID:19) tasks
ScanArchived=Yes

ScanSfxArchived=Yes

ScanMailBases=No

ScanPlainMail=No

TimeLimit=0

SizeLimit=0

FirstAction=Recommended


                                          632
SecondAction=Skip

UseExcludeMasks=No

UseExcludeThreats=No

ReportCleanObjects=No

ReportPackedObjects=No

ReportUnprocessedObjects=No

UseAnalyzer=Yes

HeuristicLevel=Recommended

UseIChecker=Yes

ScanContainers=Yes

ContainerNameMask=*

ScanImages=Yes

ImageNameMask=*

DeepScan=No

ContainerScanAction=StopContainerIfFailed

ImageAction=Skip

UseGlobalExclusions=Yes


 You can also use the option in this configuration file for the Custom Container Scan task.




Default settings for the Behavior_Detection task (ID:20)
UseTrustedPrograms=No

TaskMode=Block



Default settings for the Application_Control task (ID:21)
AppControlMode=DenyList

AppControlRulesAction=ApplyRules




                                                      633
Default settings for the Inventory_Scan task (ID:22)
ScanScripts=Yes

ScanBinaries=Yes

ScanAllExecutable=Yes

CreateGoldenImage=No

[ScanScope.item_0000]

AreaDesc=All objects

UseScanArea=Yes

Path=/usr/bin

AreaMask.item_0000=*



Default settings for KATAEDR task (ID:24)
UseClientPinnedCertificate=No

SynchronizationPeriod=5

ConnectionTimeout=10

RequestTimeout=10

EnableTelemetry=Yes

[Endpoints.item_0000]

Address=

Port=443

[EventTransferSettings]

MaximumDataTransferTime=30

UseRequestCountLimits=Yes

MaximumNumberOfEventsInHour=3000

EventLimitExceededPercentage=15




                                     634
Default settings for the Web_Control task (ID:26)
WebControlDefaultAction=Allow

ComplaintRecipient=



Default settings for the Standalone_Sandbox task (ID:29)
ConnectionTimeout=10

RequestTimeout=10

UseClientCertificate=No

[Servers.item_0000]

Address=127.0.0.1

Port=443

[SandboxTransferSettings]

SandboxQueue=1024



Default settings for KATANDR task (ID:31)
UseClientPinnedCertificate=No

SynchronizationPeriod=5

ConnectionTimeout=10

RequestTimeout=10

[Endpoints.item_0000]

Address=127.0.0.1

Port=8081

[EventTransferSettings]

MaximumDataTransferTime=30

MaximumNumberOfEventsInPackage=1024

UseRequestCountLimits=Yes

MaximumNumberOfEventsInHour=3000
                                      635
EventLimitExceededPercentage=15

PingPeriod=450



Default settings for the KUMA task (ID:33)
UseClientCertificate=No

UseTls=No

ConnectionTimeout=5

[Servers.item_0000]

Address=127.0.0.1

Port=443

Protocol=TCP

[SiemTransferSettings]

EventTransferTimeMax=30



General application settings
General application settings define the operation of the application as a whole and the operation of individual
functions.

General application settings

                    Setting                         Description                                            Values

   SambaConfigPath                    Directory that stores the Samba            The standard directory of the SAMBA configuration file
                                      configuration file. The Samba              on the computer is specified by default.
                                      configuration file is required to ensure   Default value: /etc/samba/smb.conf.
                                      that the AllShared or Shared:SMB
                                      values can be used for the Path            The application must be restarted after this setting is
                                      setting.                                   changed.

   NfsExportPath                      The directory where the NFS                The standard directory of the NFS configuration file
                                      configuration file is stored. The NFS      on the computer is specified by default.
                                      configuration file is required to ensure   Default value: /etc/exports.
                                      that the AllShared or Shared:NFS
                                      values can be used for the Path            The application must be restarted after this setting is
                                      setting.                                   changed.

   TraceLevel                         Enable application tracing and the level   Detailed – Generate a detailed trace file.
                                      of detail in the trace files.
                                                                                  MediumDetailed – Generate a trace file that contains
                                                                                 informational messages and error messages.
                                                                                 NotDetailed – Generate a trace file that contains error
                                                                                 messages.
                                                                                 None (default value) — Do not generate a trace file.




                                                             636
              Setting                            Description                                               Values

TraceFolder                        The directory that stores the               Default value: /var/log/kaspersky/kesl.
                                   application trace files.                    If you specify a different directory, make sure that
                                                                               the account under which Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                                                                               is running has only read/write permissions
                                                                               for this directory (rwx-------- 700 permissions). Root
                                                                               privileges are required to access the default trace files
                                                                               directory.
                                                                               The application must be restarted after this setting is
                                                                               changed.

TraceMaxFileCount                  Maximum number of application trace         1–10000
                                   files.                                      Default value: 10.
                                                                               The application must be restarted after this setting is
                                                                               changed.

TraceMaxFileSize                   Specifies the maximum size of an            1–1000
                                   application trace file (in megabytes).      Default value: 500.
                                                                               The application must be restarted after this setting is
                                                                               changed.

BlockFilesGreaterMaxFileNamePath   Blocks access to files for which the full   4096–33554432
                                   path length exceeds the defined
                                                                               Default value: 16384.
                                   settings value specified in bytes. If the
                                   length of the full path to the scanned      After changing the value of this setting, the File Threat
                                   file exceeds the value of this setting,     Protection task needs to be restarted.
                                   scan tasks skip this file during
                                   scanning.
                                   This setting is not available for
                                   operating systems that use the
                                   fanotify technology.

DetectOtherObjects                 Enable detection of legitimate               Yes : enable detection of legitimate applications that
                                   applications that intruders can use to      intruders can use to compromise devices or data.
                                   compromise devices or data.
                                                                               No (default): disable detection of legitimate applications
                                                                               that intruders can use to compromise devices or data.

NamespaceMonitoring                Enable scanning of namespaces and           Yes (default value) — Enable scanning of namespaces and
                                   containers.                                 containers.
                                                                               No — Disable scanning of namespaces and containers.

                                      The application does not scan
                                      namespaces and containers
                                      unless components for working
                                      with containers and
                                      namespaces are installed in the
                                      operating system.



FileBlockDuringScan                Enabling the file operation intercept       Yes (default value) to block access to files for the
                                   mode with blocking access to files for      duration of the scan.
                                   the duration of the scan. The file
                                                                               No to allow access to files during the scan. Requests to
                                   operation interception mode affects
                                                                               any file is allowed, scanning is done asynchronously. This
                                   the File Threat Protection and Device
                                                                               file operation interception mode has less impact on the
                                   Control components.
                                                                               system performance, but there is a risk that a threat in a
                                                                               file will not be disinfected or deleted if the file can, for
                                                                               example, change its name during a scan before the
                                                                               application makes a decision on the status of the file.

UseKSN                             Enabling Kaspersky Security Network         Basic - enable use of Kaspersky Security Network in
                                   usage:                                      standard mode.
                                                                               Extended - enable use of Kaspersky Security Network in
                                                                               extended mode.
                                                                               No (default value) — disable use of Kaspersky Security
                                                                               Network.




                                                          637
                Setting                 Description                                           Values

CloudMode                 Enable cloud mode. Cloud mode is         Yes — enable the operating mode in which Kaspersky
                          available if use of KSN is enabled.      Endpoint Security uses a lightweight version of the
                          If you plan to use cloud mode, make      malware databases.
                          sure KSN is available on your device.    No (default value) – use the full version of the malware
                                                                   databases.

                             This setting applies only if the
                             application is used in standard          Cloud mode is disabled automatically if use of KSN is
                             mode.                                    disabled.



UseMDR                    Enabling the Managed Detection and       Yes to enable the Managed Detection and Response
                          Response component for integration       component.
                          with Kaspersky Managed Detection
                                                                   No (default value) – disable the Managed Detection and
                          and Response.
                                                                   Response component.

UseEdrOptimum             Enabling the EDR Optimum                 Yes – Enable the EDR Optimum component.
                          component for integration with
                                                                   No (default) – Disable the EDR Optimum component.
                          Kaspersky Endpoint Detection and
                          Response Optimum.

UseProxy                  Enables use of a proxy server by         Yes - enable the use of a proxy server.
                          Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                                                                   No (default) - Disable the use of a proxy server.
                          components. The proxy server can be
                          used for access to Kaspersky             If Yes is selected, integration with the components of
                          activation servers, to update sources    Kaspersky Anti Target Attack Platform is performed
                          for databases and application            through a proxy server.
                          modules, to Kaspersky Security
                          Network, and when verifying website
                          certificates using the Web Threat
                          Protection component.


                             If Kaspersky Endpoint Security
                             is used in Light Agent mode to
                             protect virtual environments,
                             the use of a proxy server for
                             connecting to Kaspersky
                             Security Network, the SVM, and
                             the Integration Server is not
                             supported.




ProxyServer               Proxy server settings in the following
                          format: < connection
                          protocol >:// [ < user >[:
                          < password >]@]< proxy server
                          address >[:< port > ].



                             Connecting to a proxy server
                             over HTTPS is not supported.




                             When connecting via an HTTP
                             proxy, we recommend to use a
                             separate account that is not
                             used to sign in to other systems.
                             An HTTP proxy uses an insecure
                             connection, and the account
                             may be compromised.




ProxyBypass               List of addresses for which the proxy    The address is specified in the [ < address >[:< port > ]
                          server is to be bypassed.                format.
                                                                   To specify addresses, you can use masks ( * symbols) and
                                                                   comments (after a \ symbol).




                                                 638
             Setting                       Description                                              Values

ProxyBypassEdr               Bypass the proxy server when                Yes to bypass the proxy server when connecting to KATA
                             connecting to KATA servers.                 servers.
                                                                         No (default value) to use the proxy server when
                                                                         connecting to KATA servers.

ProxyBypassNdr               Bypass the proxy server when                Yes to bypass the proxy server when connecting to NDR
                             connecting to NDR servers.                  servers.
                                                                         No (default value) to use the proxy server when
                                                                         connecting to NDR servers.

ProxyBypassSandbox           Bypass the proxy server when                Yes to bypass the proxy server when connecting to
                             connecting to Sandbox servers.              Sandbox servers.
                                                                         No (default value) to use the proxy server when
                                                                         connecting to Sandbox servers.

MaxEventsNumber              The maximum number of events                Default value: 500000.
                             stored by the application. When the         If 0 is specified, events are not saved.
                             specified number of events is
                             exceeded, the application deletes the
                             oldest events.

LimitNumberOfScanFileTasks   The maximum number of custom scan           0–100000
                             tasks that a non-privileged user can        0 means a non-privileged user cannot start custom scan
                             simultaneously start on the device.         tasks.
                             This setting does not limit the number
                             of tasks that a user with root privileges   Default value: 5.
                             can start.

UseSyslog                    Enable logging of information about         Yes — Enable logging of information about events to
                             events to syslog                            syslog.
                             Root privileges are required to access      No (default value) — Disable logging of information about
                             syslog.                                     events to syslog.

EventsStoragePath            The database directory where the            Default value:
                             application saves information about         /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/private/storage/events.db.
                             events.
                             Root privileges are required to access
                             the default event database.




                                                    639
             Setting                              Description                                              Values

ExcludedMountPoint.item_#           The mount point to exclude from the       AllRemoteMounted — Exclude all remote directories
                                    scan scope. The exclusion applies to      mounted on the device using SMB and NFS protocols from
                                    the operation of the File Threat          file operation interception.
                                    Protection, Anti-Cryptor, and
                                                                               Mounted:NFS — Exclude all remote directories mounted
                                    Container Monitoring components
                                                                              on the device using the NFS protocol from file operation
                                    and the Removable Drives Scan task,
                                                                              interception.
                                    and is also configured in the operation
                                    of ODS and ContainerScan scan              Mounted:SMB — Exclude all remote directories mounted
                                    tasks.                                    on the device using the SMB protocol from file operation
                                                                              interception.
                                    You can specify several mount points
                                    to be excluded from scans.                Mounted:< file system type > — Exclude all mounted
                                    Mount points must be specified in the     directories with the specified file system type from file
                                                                              operation interception.
                                    same way as they are displayed in the
                                    mount command output.                     /mnt — Exclude objects in the /mnt mount point (including
                                    The ExcludedMountPoint.item_#             subdirectories) from file operation interception. This
                                                                              directory is used as the temporary mount point for
                                    setting is left unspecified by default.
                                                                              removable drives.
                                                                              < path that contains the /mnt/user* or
                                                                              /mnt/**/user_share> — Exclude objects in mount
                                                                              points whose names contain the specified mask from file
                                                                              operation interception.

                                                                                You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                directory name mask.

                                                                                You can indicate a single * character to represent any set
                                                                                of characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                                                character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent
                                                                                any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                                                                character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                                                example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                To exclude the mount point /dir , you need to specifically
                                                                                indicate /dir (no asterisk).

                                                                                The mask /dir/* excludes all mount points at the level
                                                                                below /dir but not /dir itself. The /dir/** mask
                                                                                excludes all mount points below the level of /dir but not
                                                                                /dir itself.

                                                                                You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                character in the file or directory name.




MemScanExcludedProgramPath.item_#   Exclude process memory from scans.         < full path to process > – Do not scan the process
                                    The application does not scan the         in the indicated local directory. You can use masks to
                                    memory of the indicated process.          specify the path.

                                                                                You can use the * (asterisk) character to create a file or
                                                                                directory name mask.

                                                                                You can indicate a single * character to represent any set
                                                                                of characters (including an empty set) preceding the /
                                                                                character in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                /dir/*/file or /dir/*/*/file .

                                                                                You can indicate two consecutive * characters to represent
                                                                                any set of characters (including an empty set and the /
                                                                                character) in the file or directory name. For example,
                                                                                /dir/**/file*/ or /dir/file**/ .

                                                                                The ** mask can be used only once in a directory name. For
                                                                                example, /dir/**/**/file is an incorrect mask.

                                                                                You can use a single ? character to represent any one
                                                                                character in the file or directory name.




                                                            640
               Setting                            Description                                             Values

  UseOnDemandCPULimit               Enables CPU usage limits for tasks of      Yes : enable the CPU usage limit for ODS, ContainerScan,
                                    the following types: ODS,                  and InventoryScan tasks.
                                    ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.
                                                                               No (default): disable CPU usage limits for tasks.

  OnDemandCPULimit                  Maximum utilization of all processor       Integer value from 10 to 100.
                                    cores (as a percentage) for tasks of       Default value: 100.
                                    the following types: ODS,
                                    ContainerScan, and InventoryScan.

  BackupDaysToLive                  Time period for storing objects in the     0–10000
                                    Backup storage (in days). After the
                                                                               0–unlimited retention.
                                    specified time has elapsed, the
                                    application deletes the oldest backup      Default value: 30.
                                    copies of files.
                                    To remove the object retention limit,
                                    set 0.

  BackupSizeLimit                   Maximum Backup size in MB. When the        0–999999
                                    maximum Backup storage size is             0–unlimited size.
                                    reached, the application deletes the
                                    oldest backup copies of files.             Default value: 0.

                                    To remove the Backup size limit, set 0.

  QuarantineBackupFolder            Path to the Backup directory. This         Default value: /var/opt/kaspersky/kesl/common/objects-
                                    directory is also used to store            backup/
                                    quarantined files.                         Root privileges are required to access the default Backup
                                    You can specify a custom Backup            storage directory.
                                    storage directory that is different
                                    from the default directory. If the
                                    specified directory does not exist or is
                                    unavailable, the application uses the
                                    default directory.

  QuarantineFillingNotification     The percentage of Quarantine that          0–100
                                    must be full to generate an event
                                                                               0 – generating events about Quarantine being full is
                                    about Quarantine being full.               disabled.
                                    To disable generating events about         Default value: 90.
                                    Quarantine being full, enter 0.

  QuarantineSizeLimit               Maximum size of the Quarantine (in         0–999999
                                    megabytes). When the maximum               0 means the Quarantine size is not limited.
                                    Quarantine size is reached, the
                                    application deletes the oldest files.      The default value is 200 if the application is being used in
                                                                               Basic mode, and 100 if the application is being used in
                                    To make the size of Quarantine             Light Agent mode.
                                    unlimited, enter 0.

  ShowPopUpNotifications            Enables displaying pop-up                  Yes (default value) – show pop-up notifications in the
                                    notifications in the graphical user        graphical user interface.
                                    interface.
                                                                               No – do not show pop-up notifications in the graphical
                                                                               user interface.




General Container Scan settings
The container scan general settings are used when scanning namespaces and containers in real time.




                                                           641
General container and namespace scan settings

                Setting                                            Description                                               Values

   OnAccessContainerScanAction         Action to be performed on a container when an infected          StopContainerIfFailed (default value) —
                                       object is detected.                                             Stop the container if an infected object
                                                                                                       cannot be disinfected or deleted.
                                                                                                       StopContainer — Stop the container when
                                          This setting is available when using the application         an infected object is detected.
                                          under a license that supports this function.
                                                                                                       Skip — Do not perform any action on
                                                                                                       containers when an infected object is
                                       File Threat Protection task settings are used when              detected.
                                       scanning objects inside a container. The action taken on a
                                       container when an infected object is detected also
                                       depends on the specified settings of the File Threat
                                       Protection task.

   UseDocker                           Using the Docker container management system.                   Yes (default) enables the use of the Docker
                                                                                                       container management system.
                                                                                                       No disables the use of the Docker container
                                          Integration with Docker 28.5.2 and earlier is                management system.
                                          supported.




   DockerSocket                        Docker socket path or URI (Universal Resource Identifier).      Default value: /var/run/docker.sock.

   UseCrio                             Use the CRI-O environment.                                      Yes (default value) — Use the CRI-O
                                                                                                       environment.
                                                                                                        No — Do not use the CRI-O environment.

   CrioConfigFilePath                  Path to the CRI-O configuration file.                           Default value: /etc/crio/crio.conf.

   UsePodman                           Use the Podman utility.                                          Yes (default value) — Use the Podman utility.
                                                                                                        No — Do not use the Podman utility.

   PodmanBinaryPath                    Path to the Podman utility executable file.                     Default value: /usr/bin/podman.

   PodmanRootFolder                    Path to the root directory of the container storage.            Default value: /var/lib/containers/storage.

   UseRunc                             Use the runc utility.                                            Yes (default value) — Use the runc utility.
                                                                                                        No : do not use the runc utility.

   RuncBinaryPath                      Path to the runc utility executable file.                       Default value: /usr/bin/runc.

   RuncRootFolder                      Path to the root directory of the container state storage.      Default value: /run/runc.


The StopContainerIfFailed action taken on a container when an infected object is detected may vary
depending on the specified values of the FirstAction and SecondAction settings of the File Threat Protection
task. If the File Threat Protection task fails to disinfect or delete an infected object, the container will be stopped.
In all other cases, no action is applied to the container.



Network traffic scan settings
Network traffic scan settings

                     Setting                                   Description                                        Values

   EncryptedConnectionsScan                       Enables or disables encrypted      Yes (default value)—Enable encrypted connections scanning.
                                                  traffic scan.
                                                                                     No : disable encrypted connection scanning. The application
                                                  For the FTP protocol,              does not decrypt the encrypted traffic.
                                                  encrypted connections
                                                  scanning is disabled by
                                                  default.

   EncryptedConnectionsScanErrorAction            Specifies the action to            AddToAutoExclusions (default value) — Add the domain where
                                                  perform when an encrypted          an error occurred to the list of domains with scan errors. The
                                                  connections scan error             application will not monitor encrypted network traffic when this
                                                  occurs on a website.               domain is visited.
                                                                                     Disconnect — Block the network connection.


                                                                         642
                     Setting                                 Description                                            Values

   CertificateVerificationPolicy                   Specifies the way Kaspersky        FullCheck (default value) — The application uses the Internet
                                                   Endpoint Security checks           to check and download the missing chains that are required to
                                                   certificates.                      verify a certificate.
                                                   If a certificate is self-signed,   LocalCheck — The application does not use the Internet to
                                                   the application does not           verify a certificate.
                                                   perform the additional
                                                   verification.

   UntrustedCertificateAction                      The action to take when an         Allow (default value) — Allow network connections established
                                                   unconfirmed certificate is         while visiting a domain with an untrusted certificate.
                                                   detected.
                                                                                      Block — Block network connections established while visiting a
                                                                                      domain with an untrusted certificate.

   ManageExclusions                                Using exclusions when              Yes — Do not scan websites specified under
                                                   scanning encrypted traffic.        [Exclusions.item_#] (see below).
                                                                                      No (default value) — Scan all websites.

   MonitorNetworkPorts                             Specifies the way Kaspersky        Selected (default value) — Monitor only network ports
                                                   Endpoint Security monitors         specified in the [NetworkPorts.item_#] section (see below).
                                                   network ports.
                                                                                      All — Monitor all network ports.



                                                                                         Specifying this value may significantly increase an
                                                                                         operating system load.



   The [Exclusions.item_#] section contains domains excluded from scans. The application does not scan connections established when visiting
   specified domains.

   DomainName                                      Specifies the domain name.         The default value is not defined.
                                                   You can use masks to specify
                                                   the domain.

   The [NetworkPorts.item_#] section contains the network ports monitored by the application.

   PortName                                        Network port description.          The default value is not defined.

   Port                                            Network port numbers to be         1 – 65535 .
                                                   monitored by the application.
                                                                                      The default value is not defined.




Tasks schedule settings
Task start schedule settings

           Setting                                       Description                                                         Values

   RuleType                    Task launch schedule.                                                Once : run the task once.
                                                                                                    Monthly : run the task on the specified day and
                                                                                                    time every month.
                                                                                                    Weekly : run the task on the specified day and time
                                                                                                    every week.
                                                                                                     Daily : run the task regularly, at the specified
                                                                                                    interval in days.
                                                                                                     Hourly : run the task regularly, at the specified
                                                                                                    interval in hours, starting on the specified date and
                                                                                                    time.
                                                                                                     Minutely : run the task regularly, at the specified
                                                                                                    interval in minutes, starting at the specified time.
                                                                                                    Manual – start the task manually.
                                                                                                    PS – start the task after starting the application.
                                                                                                    BR – start the task after the application databases
                                                                                                    have been updated.




                                                                         643
        Setting                                     Description                                                      Values

  StartTime             Task start date and time.                                             [< year >/< month >/< day of the month >]
                        The StartTime option is required if the RuleType option is            [ hh ]:[ mm ]:[ ss ]; [< day of the month >|
                        set to one of the following: Once, Monthly, Weekly, Daily, Hourly,    < day of the week >]; [< start
                        or Minutely.                                                          periodicity >] .

  RandomInterval        A time interval from 0 to the specified value (in minutes), which     Default value: 99 minutes.
                        will be added to the task start time to avoid starting tasks at the
                        same time.

  RunMissedStartRules   Runs a missed task after the application is started.                  Yes (default value) – enable running a missed task
                                                                                              after the application is launched.
                                                                                              No : does not enable running a missed task after
                                                                                              the application starts.

  UseWorkingTimeout     Stops the task upon reaching the maximum task execution time          Yes – Stop the task when the maximum task
                        specified by the WorkingTimeout setting. The task will be             execution time has been reached.
                        stopped even if it is not completed. The next launch of the task
                                                                                              No (default value) – Do not stop the task when the
                        will be performed according to the schedule.
                                                                                              maximum task execution time has been reached.

  WorkingTimeout        The maximum task execution time (in minutes) after which the          Default value: 120 minutes.
                        application stops executing the task if
                        UseWorkingTimeout=yes .




Appendix 4. Command line return codes
Kaspersky Endpoint Security has the following command line return codes:

0 means command/task completed successfully

1 means general error in command syntax

2 means error in passed application settings.

64 means Kaspersky Endpoint Security is not running.

66 means application databases are not loaded (used only by the kesl-control --app-info command).

67 means activation 2.0 ended with an error due to network problems.

68 means the command cannot be executed because the application is managed by a policy.

69 means the application is located in the Amazon Paid Ami infrastructure.

70 – an attempt to start a running task, delete a running task, change the settings of a running task, stop a stopped
 task, pause a suspended task, or resume a running task.

71 – Kaspersky Security Network Statement has not been accepted.

72 means threats were detected during execution of the Custom Scan or Custom Container Scan task.

73 means attempt to set Application Control task settings that affect the operation of the application without
 confirming them using the --accept option.

74 means Kaspersky Endpoint Security must be restarted after an update.

75 means the device must be restarted.
                                                                  644
76 — connection prohibited, as only users with root rights should have write access to the specified path.

77 means the specified license key is already in use on the device.

78 means the command/task cannot be run because the application is being used in Light Agent mode.

79 means the command cannot be run because the application is being used in standard mode.

128 means unknown error.

65 – all other errors.




Appendix 5. Configuring interaction with Kaspersky Anti-
Virus for Linux Mail Server
To configure joint operation of Kaspersky Endpoint Security and Kaspersky Anti-Virus for Linux Mail Server:

 1. Save the File Threat Protection task settings in the configuration file using the following command:
   kesl-control --get-settings 1 --file < full path to file >

 2. Open the created configuration file for editing.

 3. Add the following section to the created file:
   [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_< item number >]
   Path=/var/opt/kaspersky/klms

 4. Repeat the section specified above for all mail agents integrated with Kaspersky Anti-Virus for Linux
    Mail Server.

 5. To exclude the temporary directory of filters and services of Kaspersky Anti-Virus for Linux Mail Server from
    scanning, add the following section to the created file:
   [ExcludedFromScanScope.item_< item number >]
   Path=/tmp/klmstmp

 6. Save the changes in the configuration file.

 7. Import settings from the configuration file to the File Threat Protection task by using the following command:
   kesl-control --set-settings 1 --file < full path to file >




                                                        645
Sources of information about Kaspersky
Endpoint Security
Kaspersky Endpoint Security page in the Knowledge Base

The Knowledge Base is a section of the Kaspersky Technical Support website.

On the Kaspersky Endpoint Security page in the Knowledge Base , you can read articles that provide useful
information, recommendations, and answers to frequently asked questions on how to purchase, install, and use the
application.

Articles in the Knowledge Base may provide answers to questions that relate both to Kaspersky Endpoint Security
as well as to other Kaspersky applications. Articles in the Knowledge Base may also contain Technical Support
news.


Discuss Kaspersky applications on the forum

If your question does not require an immediate answer, you can discuss it with Kaspersky experts and other users
on the Forum .

The Forum lets you view discussion topics, post comments, and create new discussion topics.




                                                      646
Glossary

Active key
A key that is currently used by the application.




Active policy
Policy currently used by the application to control data leaks. The application can use several policies at the same
time.




Administration group
A set of devices combined in Kaspersky Security Center in accordance with the functions they perform and the
set of Kaspersky applications installed on them. Devices are grouped to simplify administration as the group of
devices can be managed as a single entity. An administration group can include other groups. For each application
installed in the administration group, group policies and group tasks can be created.




Administration Server
A component of Kaspersky Security Center that centrally stores information about all Kaspersky applications
installed within the corporate network. It can also be used to manage these applications.




Application activation
Switching the application to the fully functional mode. Application activation is performed during or after the
installation of the application. You need an activation code or a key file to activate the application.




Application databases
Databases that contain information about computer security threats known to Kaspersky as of when the
databases are released. Application databases are created by Kaspersky experts and updated hourly.




Application settings
Application settings that are common to all types of tasks and govern the overall operation of the application,
such as application performance settings, reporting settings, and backup settings.




                                                        647
Database of malicious web addresses
A list of web resources whose content may be considered as dangerous. The list is created by Kaspersky experts;
it is regularly updated and is included in the distribution kit of Kaspersky applications.




Database of phishing web addresses
A list of web resource addresses that are identified by Kaspersky experts as phishing. The database is regularly
updated and is included in the distribution kit of Kaspersky applications.




Exclusion
Exclusion is an object excluded from the Kaspersky application scan. You can exclude from scan files of certain
formats, file masks, a certain area (for example, a folder or an application), application processes, or objects by
name, according to the Virus Encyclopedia classification. Each task can be assigned a set of exclusions.




False positive
A situation when a Kaspersky application considers a non-infected object to be infected because the object's
code is similar to that of a virus.




File mask
Representation of a file name using wildcards. The standard wildcards used in file masks are * and ?, where * is any
number of any characters, and ? is any single character.




Group policy
see Policy.




Group task
A task assigned to an administration group and performed on all managed devices included in this administration
group.




Infected object
An object which includes a portion of code that completely matches the part of a known malware code. Kaspersky
experts do not recommend accessing such objects.

                                                         648
Integration Server
Kaspersky Endpoint Security for Virtualization Light Agent component. Interacts between Kaspersky Endpoint
Security components and the virtual infrastructure.




Kaspersky update servers
Kaspersky HTTP and FTP servers from which Kaspersky applications download database and application module
updates.




License
A time-limited right to use the application, granted under the End User License Agreement.




License certificate
A document that you receive from Kaspersky along with the key file or activation code. This document contains
information about the license provided.




Light Agent
Kaspersky Endpoint Security for Virtualization Light Agent component. Installed on each virtual machine that
needs to be protected.




Object disinfection
A method of processing infected objects that results in full or partial recovery of data. Not all infected objects can
be disinfected.




Policy
A policy determines the application settings and manages the access to configuration of an application installed
on devices within an administration group. An individual policy must be created for each application. You can create
an unlimited number of various policies for applications installed on the devices in each administration group, but
only one policy can be applied to each application at a time within an administration group.




                                                        649
Proxy server
A computer network service which allows users to make indirect requests to other network services. First, a user
connects to a proxy server and requests a resource (e.g., a file) located on another server. Then the proxy server
either connects to the specified server and obtains the resource from it or returns the resource from its own
cache (if the proxy has its own cache). In some cases, a user's request or a server's response can be modified by
the proxy server for certain purposes.




Reserve key
A key that certifies the right to use the application but is not currently being used.




SIEM system
Security Information and Event Management system. A solution for managing information and events in the
security system of an organization.




Startup objects
A set of applications needed for the operating system and software that is installed on the computer to start and
operate correctly. These objects are executed every time the operating system is started. There are viruses
capable of infecting such objects specifically, which may lead, for example, to blocking of operating system startup.




Subscription
Enables use of the application with the selected settings (expiration date and the number of devices). You can
pause or resume your subscription, renew it automatically, or cancel it.




SVM
Secure virtual machine – a special virtual machine on which the scanserver service (Protection Server, a
component of Kaspersky Endpoint Security for Virtualization Light Agent) is installed.




Trusted device
Device that can be fully accessed at any time by the users listed under the trusted device settings.




                                                         650
Information about third-party code
Information about third-party code is contained in the file legal_notices.txt located in the application installation
folder.




                                                         651
Trademark notices
Registered trademarks and service marks are the property of their respective owners.

Amazon is a trademark of Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates.

Mac and FireWire are trademarks of Apple Inc.

Arm is a registered trademark of Arm Limited (or its subsidiaries) in the US and/or elsewhere.

The Bluetooth word, mark and logos are owned by Bluetooth SIG, Inc.

Ubuntu and LTS are registered trademarks of Canonical Ltd.

XenServer is either a registered trademark or trademark of Cloud Software Group, Inc., and/or its subsidiaries in
the United States and/or other countries.

Cloudflare, the Cloudflare logo, and Cloudflare Workers are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of
Cloudflare, Inc. in the United States and other jurisdictions.

The Grafana Word Mark and Grafana Logo are either registered trademarks/service marks or trademarks/service
marks of Coding Instinct AB, in the United States and other countries and are used with Coding Instinct’s
permission. We are not affiliated with, endorsed or sponsored by Coding Instinct, or the Grafana community.

Docker and the Docker logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Docker, Inc. in the United States and/or
other countries. Docker, Inc. and other parties may also have trademark rights in other terms used herein.

Chrome, Google Public DNS are trademarks of Google LLC.

HUAWEI, EulerOS, and FusionSphere are trademarks of Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Intel, Core are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries.

Linux is the registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the U.S. and other countries.

Microsoft, Active Directory, Hyper-V, Outlook, Visual C++, and Windows are trademarks of the Microsoft group of
companies.

OpenStack is a registered trademark of the OpenStack Foundation in the United States and other countries.

Oracle and JavaScript are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Red Hat, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, CentOS, Fedora are trademarks or registered trademarks of Red Hat, Inc. or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Debian is a registered trademark of Software in the Public Interest, Inc.

SUSE is a registered trademark of SUSE LLC in the United States and other countries.

Kubernetes is a registered trademark of The Linux Foundation in the United States and other countries.

Rocky Linux is a trademark of The Rocky Enterprise Software Foundation.


                                                         652
UNIX is a registered trademark in the United States and other countries, licensed exclusively through X/Open
Company Limited.

Zabbix is a registered trademark of Zabbix SIA.




                                                      653
